--- PAGE 1 ---
THE CRITICAL READER

THE COMPLETE GUIDE TO

devoted to each question type

speed and comprehension

to apply what you’ve learned

to help you answer the
most challenging questions

Erica L. Meltzer

author of The Ultimate Guide to SAT’ Grammar

SAT® is a trademark registered by the College Board, which is not affiliated with, and does not endorse, this publication.

--- PAGE 2 ---
LIS IO RSIS EO ASS LEY LEER Ce III

OP REAR A SA tt See

The Critical Reader

The Complete Guide to
SAT” Reading

Third Edition

Erica L. Meltzer

ATHE CRITICAL READER

New York

--- PAGE 3 ---
Copyright © 2013-2017 The Critical Reader
Cover © 2017 Tugboat Design

All rights reserved,

With the exception of the works cited in the Reprints and Permissions section (p. 345), the
information contained in this document is the original and exclusive work of Erica L. Meltzer.

No part of this work may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without written
permission from the author.

For information regarding bulk purchases, reprints, and foreign rights, please send
correspondence to thecriticalreader1@gmail.com.

SAT® is a trademark registered by the College Board, which is not affiliated with, and does not
endorse, this publication.

ISBN-13: 978-0-9975178-7-3
ISBN-10: 0997517875

--- PAGE 4 ---
Dedication

To Ricky, who pestered me to write this book until I finally acquiesced.

--- PAGE 5 ---
ALSO BY ERICA MELTZER

The Critical Reader: AP® English Language and Composition Edition
: The Ultimate Guide to SAT® Grammar & Workbook
SAT® Vocabulary: A New Approach (with Larry Krieger)
The Complete Guide to ACT® English
The Complete Guide to ACT® Reading
| The Complete GMAT® Sentence Correction Guide
| GRE® Vocabulary in Practice

--- PAGE 6 ---
PEELE RNIN ae SI GLUON ON bon G3 ARON NIN OD et

Table of Contents

Preface
How to Use This Book
Suggested Reading
Introduction to SAT® Reading
What Does SAT Reading Test?
Managing the Reading Test as a Whole
The Answer Isn't Always /n the Passage
Understanding Answer Choices
Understanding Line References
Strategies for Reading Passages
Skimming Effectively Means Knowing What to Focus On
Using Key Words: Managing Questions Without Line References
How to Work Through Questions with Line References
General Tips for Reading Prep
4. Vocabulary in Context
Strategies
Second Meanings and Answer Choices
Common Second Meanings
Additional Words to Know
Vocabulary in Context Exercises
Explanations: Vocabulary in Context Exercises
2. Making the Leap: From Concrete to Abstract
Why Use Pronouns?
The Former and the Latter
Pronoun and Compression Noun Exercises
Explanations: Pronoun and Compression Noun Exercises
3. The Big Picture
Identifying Topics
What's the Point?

vii

11
14
16
19
19
21
23
23
24
24
26
29
30
36
43
44
50
51
53
54
61
65
66
69
70
77
79
80
82

--- PAGE 7 ---
Point of a Paragraph
Oid Idea vs. New Idea
Using the “Old Idea” to Predict Main Point and Attitude
Fiction Passages: What if the Main Point Isn't Obvious?
Order of Events
Supporting Examples: Working Backwards
Main Point vs. Primary Purpose
The Big Picture Exercises
Explanations: The Big Picture Exercises
Supporting Evidence
Supporting and Contradicting Claims

Supporting and Contradicting Claims Exercises

Explanations: Supporting and Contradicting Claims Exercises

Literal Comprehension: Same Idea, Different Words
Other Approaches
Using Line References to Make Educated Guesses
Literal Comprehension Exercises
Explanations: Literal Comprehension Exercises
Reasonable Inferences
Fallacies and incorrect Answers
Unstated Assumptions
inference Exercises
Explanations: Inference Exercises
Extended Reasoning and Analogies

Extended Reasoning and Analogy Exercises

Explanations: Extended Reasoning and Analogy Exercises

Reading for Function
Types of Function Questions
Chart: Functions of Key Words and Punctuation

“Vague” Answers

viil

85
87
88
93
97
98

100

103

114

117

120

124

129

131

138

141

142

154

158

159

171

175

186

189

195

201

203
204
205
212

--- PAGE 8 ---
Playing Positive and Negative with Function Questions 214

Chart: Common Function Words and Phrases 216

Reading for Function Exercises 217
: Explanations: Reading for Function Exercises 227

Glossary of Function Words 230
: 9. Tone and Attitude 232
Neutral Tone, Definite Opinion 232
| Playing Positive/Negative with Tone and Attitude Questions 234
Inferring Attitude 236
: Simplifying “Tone” Answers 238
Register: Formal vs. Informal 240
| Certainty and Uncertainty 242
| Humor, Sarcasm, and frony 243
: Chart: Common Tone and Attitude Words 245
: Tone and Attitude Exercises 246
| Explanations: Tone and Attitude Exercises 253
: 10. Rhetorical Strategy 255
Point of View 255
| Paragraph and Passage Organization 260
Counterargumenis 264
: Effect of a Rhetorical Strategy 267
Rhetorical Strategy Exercises 268
Explanations: Rhetorical Strategy Exercises 274
| 11. Paired Passages 276
Overview of Paired Passages 277
How to Read Paired Passages 278
: Relationship Questions are Inference Questions 279
| Paired Passages and Supporting Evidence Questions 286
: Agreement Questions 288
: Paired Passage Exercises 291
| Explanations: Paired Passage Exercises 297

--- PAGE 9 ---
12. Graphics and Data Analysis

Reading Graphs: Finding the Point and Skimming

Reading Between the Lines

Multiple Variables

“Backwards” Graphs and “Trick” Answers

Tables

Paired Graphics

To Synthesize...Or Not

Graphics and Extended Reasoning

Graphics and Data Analysis Exercises

Explanations: Graphics and Data Analysis Exercises
Appendix A: 2018 Official Guide Questions by Category
Appendix B: 2018 Official Guide Questions by Test
Reprints and Permissions

About the Author

300
301
303
304
307
310
311
313
327
322
331
335
340
345
349

--- PAGE 10 ---
TN SNES tiie Ca ZT ns Sh ea

€
Ei
%
4
4
i

‘

SPM pe reaes

aL ai Cae ak a

Re TNE

SREY SRNR EN RENO AS FEA

BERTONE ont WOR SS AOR aA Hannan res ORG Saeed ea nie Repoasna eb E AVS NEU OPENS 2 out

Femi LR a eS DD sy ONE NR nie

Preface

Eight years elapsed between my last SAT®, which I took as a senior in high school, and the
first time I was asked to tutor reading for the SAT. I distinctly remember sitting in Barnes &
Noble, hunched over the Official Guide, staring at the questions in horror and wondering how
on earth [ had ever gotten an 800 at the age of 17. Mind you, I felt completely flummoxed by
the SAT after I had spent four years studying literature in college.

Somehow or other, I managed to muddle through my first reading tutoring sessions. I tried to
pretend that I knew what I was doing, but to be perfectly honest, I was pretty lost. I had to
look up answers in the back of the book. A Jot. I lost count of the number of times I had to
utter the words, “I think you're right, but give me one second and let me just double-check
that answer...” It was mortifying. No tutor wants to come off as clueless in front of a sixteen-
year-old, but I was looking like I had no idea what I was doing. Grammar I could handle, but
when it came to teaching reading, I was in way over my head. I simply had no idea how to
put into words what had always come naturally to me. Besides, half the time I wasn’t sure of
the right answer myself.

Luckily for me, fate intervened in the form of Laura Wilson, the founder of WilsonPrep in
Chappaqua, New York, whose company I spent several years writing tests for. Laura taught
me about the major passage themes, answer choices patterns, and structures. I learned the
importance of identifying the main point, tone and major transitions, as well as the ways in
which that information can allow a test-taker to spot correct answers quickly, efficiently, and
without second-guessing. I discovered that the skills that the SAT tested were in fact the exact
same skills that I had spent four years honing.

As a matter of fact, I came to realize that, paradoxically, my degree in French was probably
more of an aid in teaching reading than a degree in English would have been. The basic
French literary analysis exercise, known as the explication de texte linéaire, consists of close
reading of a short excerpt of text, during which the reader explains how the text functions
rhetorically from beginning to end - that is, just how structure, diction, and syntax work
together to produce meaning and convey a particular idea or point of view. In other words,
the same skills as those tested on the SAT - the old test as well as the new version. I had
considered explications de texte a pointless exercise (Rhetoric? Who studies rhetoric anymore?
That's so nineteenth century!) and resented being forced to write them in college - especially
during the year I spent at the Sorbonne, where I and my (French) classmates did little else -
but suddenly I appreciated the skills they had taught me. Once I made the connection
between what I had been studying all that time and the skills tested on the SAT, the test
made sense. I found that I had something to fall back on when I was teaching and, for the first
time, J found that I no longer had to constantly look up answers.

I still had a long way to go as a tutor, though: at first I clung a bit too rigidly to some methods
(e.g., insisting that students circle all the transitions) and often did not leave my students
enough room to find their own strategies. As I worked with more students, however, I began
to realize just how little I could take for granted in terms of pre-existing skills: most of my
students, it turned out, had significant difficulty even identifying the point of an argument,
never mind summing it up in five or so words. A lot of them didn’t even realize that passages
contained arguments at all; they thought that the authors were simply “talking about stuff.”
As a result, it never even occurred to them to identify which ideas a given author did and did
not agree with. When I instructed them to circle transitions like however and therefore as a way
of identifying the key places in an argument, many of them found it overwhelming to do so at

11

--- PAGE 11 ---
the same time they were trying to absorb the literal content of a passage. More than one
student told me they could do one or the other, but not both at the same time. In one
memorable gaffe, I told a student that while he often did not have to read every word of the
more analytical passages, he did need to read all of the literary passages - only to have him
respond that he couldn’t tell the difference, He thought of all the passages as literary because
the blurbs above them all said they came from books, and weren't all books “literary?” It
never occurred to me to tell him that he needed to look for the word novel in the blurb above
the passage in order to identify works of fiction. When I pointed out to another student that he
had answered a question incorrectly because he hadn’t realized that the author of the passage
disagreed with a particular idea, he responded without a trace of irony that the author had
spent a lot of time talking about that idea. Apparently, no one had ever introduced him to the
idea that writers often spend a good deal of time fleshing out ideas that they don’t agree with.
And this was a student scoring in the mid-600s!

Eventually, I got it. I realized that I would have to spend more time - sometimes a lot more
time ~ explaining basic contextual pieces of information that most adult readers took for
granted and, moreover, I would have to do so at the same time I covered actual test-taking
strategies, Without the fundamentals, all the strategy in the world might not even raise a
student’s score by 10 points. My goal in this book is to supply some of those fundamentals
while also covering some of the more advanced skills the exam requires.

I would, however, like to emphasize that this book is intended to help you work through and
“decode” College Board material. It is not - and should not be used as - a replacement for the
Official Guide. To that end, I have provided a list of the Reading questions from the tests in the
College Board Official Guide, 2018 Edition (also available through the Khan Academy website),
corresponding to the relevant question type at the end of each chapter.

As you work through this book, you will undoubtedly notice that some of the passages are
reused in multiple exercises. Although you may find it somewhat tedious to work through
the same passages multiple times, that repetition was a deliberate choice on my part. This
book is not designed to have you whiz through passage after passage, but rather to have you
study the workings of a limited number of passages in depth. As you work through the
exercises, you may also notice that different questions accompanying the same passage are
targeting the same concepts, merely from different angles. Again, that is a deliberate choice.
The goal is to allow you to solidify your understanding of these concepts and the various
ways in which they can be tested so that they will leap out at you when you are taking the
test for real.

In addition, I have done my best to select passages that reflect the content and themes of the
redesigned SAT. The new exam focuses much more heavily than the old on science and social
science topics, with a notable focus on the recent onslaught of new technologies (the Internet,
the rise of social media, “green” energy) and new business models (flexible and individual vs.
company-based and traditional), as well as the consequences of those developments. While
some passages will address their downsides, you can assume that the overwhelming
emphasis will be on their positive aspects.

That said, this book can of course provide no more than an introduction to the sorts of topics
you are likely to encounter on the SAT, While the College Board has been very vociferous (to
invoke an “irrelevant” term) about proclaiming that the redesigned test will reflect exactly
what students are studying in school, the reality is of course a good deal more complex.
Common Core or no Common Core, American high schools have nothing even remotely

12

--- PAGE 12 ---
F

RAPS a ASEH O Brn rea CMR

NRE SEIS ESR ELI ENR TGS, Ser

2
2

ee are

¥
q
é
4
4
}
4
é
i

ee ee eee

resembling a common curriculum, with the result that a student at High School A might
emerge from AP US History having read dozens of primary source documents from the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, while a student at High School B the next town over
might emerge from what is nominally the same class having read only a few such documents.
No short-term SAT prep program can easily compensate for knowledge gaps built up over a
dozen years or more. So while some of the passages you encounter on the test may indeed
seem familiar and accessible, others may seem very foreign. A list of suggested reading
resources is provided on the following page, and I strongly encourage you to spend 15
minutes or so a day exploring them.

Unfortunately, there is no such thing as a “pure” reading test. To some extent, your ability to
understand what you read is always bound up with your existing knowledge. Research
shows that when students whose overall reading skills are weak are asked to read about
subjects they are highly familiar with, their comprehension is better than that of students with
stronger general reading skills.1 The more familiar you are with a subject, the less time and
energy you will need to spend trying to understand a passage about it, and the faster you'll
move through the test. You'll also be familiar with any vocabulary associated with the topic,
which means you won't have to worry as much about keeping track of new terminology.

Moreover, you will probably find it much easier to identify correct and incorrect answer
choices. While it is true that answers that are true in the real world will not necessarily be
right, it is also true that correct answers will not be false in the real world. If you see an
answer that you know is factually true based on your pre-existing knowledge of a topic, you
can potentially save yourself a lot of time by checking that answer first.

Finally, encountering a passage about a subject you already know something about can be
very calming on a high-pressure test like the SAT because you will no longer be dealing with
a frightening unknown. Instead of trying to assimilate a mass of completely new information
in the space of a few minutes, you can instead place what you are reading in the context of
your existing knowledge.

Provided that you have solid comprehension skills and contextual knowledge, success in
Reading is also largely a question of approach, or method. Because the test demands a certain
degree of flexibility - no single strategy can be guaranteed to work 100% of the time ~ I have
also tried to make this book a toolbox of sorts. My goal is to provide you with a variety of
approaches and strategies that you can choose from and apply as necessary, depending on
the question at hand. Whenever possible, I have provided multiple explanations for
questions, showing how you might arrive at the answer by working in different ways and
from different sets of starting assumptions. The ability to adapt is what will ultimately make
you unshakeable - even at eight o’clock on a Saturday morning.

~Erica Meltzer

' Daniel Willingham, “How Knowledge Helps,” American Educator, Spring 2006.
https:/ /www.aft.org/ periodical/american-educator/spring-2006/how-knowledge-helps

13

--- PAGE 13 ---
How to Use this Book

As you may have noticed, this book contains a fair amount of material, and you might be
wondering just how to go about using it. If that’s the case, here’s a quick guide:

Step 1: Take a full-length diagnostic test from the Official SAT Study Guide.

I recommend choosing from among Tests 5-8 in The Official SAT® Study Guide, 2018 Edition,
because those exams were actually administered. (Tests 1-4 were written as samples before
the first administration of the redesigned SAT.)

Step 2: Identify what you need to focus on.

Mark your right and wrong answers. Then, use the index of questions by test on p. 340 to
determine the types of questions you answered incorrectly.

Step 3: Work through the relevant chapters.

If your errors are primarily concentrated in a few specific categories, you can start by focusing
on the corresponding chapters, If you want to practice with authentic questions in those
categories, you can also use the list of questions by category on p. 335 to locate relevant items
in the Official Guide.

If your errors are more random or encompass a wider range of question types, or if you have
a significant amount of time before the exam, you will probably be best served by working
through all of the chapters in order.

You may want to take practice tests periodically to gauge your progress, or you may prefer to
work through the entire book before taking another complete test.

Step 4: Build a “bridge” to the test.

When you do the end-of-chapter exercises in this book, the strategy information will usually
still be fresh, and you will also know in advance the concept that every question is testing.
When you take full-length practice tests, however, all of the question types will be mixed
together in unpredictable combinations. You will also need to recall a wide variety of
strategies and, without any prompting, recognize when to apply them. That's a big strain on
your working memory, and you may initially notice a gap between your performance on the
individual exercises and your performance on practice tests.

If you find yourself in that situation, you must essentially create a “bridge” between the book
and the test. Select a Reading Test from the Official Guide, and forget about time. Go through
every question and label its category, e.g., function, tone, inference. Make sure to mark the
supporting evidence pairs - for reasons discussed in Chapter 4, you must be prepared for
these questions. (Note: it’s probably slightly easier to mark the questions before you read the
passage so that you're primed to look for specific information as you read, but you can also
start by marking the questions if you prefer.)

Now, before you answer each question, stop and review the specific strategy it requires. For

example, you can remind yourself to read before and after line references, play
positive/negative, or focus on the conclusion. If you find it helpful, you can even write

14

--- PAGE 14 ---
2
g
5
g

(
a
:
&
a
¢
@

J
4
;
‘
4
;
:
j
‘
‘

yourself notes in the margins of your test. The goal is to practice identifying which strategies
are most appropriate in a given situation, and to become accustomed to applying them when
no one (me) is holding up a sign telling you where to start. (As I used to tell my students
when they stared at me pleadingly, “Don’t give me that look - I’m not going to be sitting
there when you take the test. You tell me what you need to do to answer the question.”)

To reiterate, it does not matter how much time you spend on this step. If you find it helpful,
you can sit with this book next to your test and flip to the corresponding chapter for each
question, reviewing the relevant sections as you work. At this point, it is much more
important to work carefully than to work quickly, particularly if you have a tendency to lose
points for careless errors. If necessary, you can even do a second test this way - however long
it takes for the process to become automatic. When things seem to be coming together, take a
timed test and see what holds.

Step #5: Review your mistakes.

I cannot stress how important this step is. Do not move on from a test until you have
reviewed every mistake and understood where things went awry, as well as what you need
to do to avoid similar errors in the future. Note that working this way also reduces the
chance that you will use up all of the Official Guide tests early on.

Step #6: Repeat as necessary until you are consistently scoring in your desired range.

To be sure, there is no way to control for every possibility. Reading is inherently less
predictable than Math, and there may indeed be times when a correct answer genuinely
hinges on something you do not fully understand and could not have foreseen. In many other
instances, however, getting the right answer is likely to be a matter of slowing down, making
sure you know exactly what you're looking for, and going step by step. If you control for
everything you can reasonably control for, you can usually get pretty far.

So yes, working this way is not always pleasant. Yes, it is more involved than simply crashing
through practice test after practice test, hoping that somehow things will just work
themselves out. But ultimately, it tends to be pretty effective. And when your scores come
back, you're a lot more likely to be happy ~ and possibly even done with the SAT for good,

15

--- PAGE 15 ---
Suggested Reading
The New York Tintes (particularly the Science section)

The Economist, www.economist.com

Scientific American, www.scientificamerican.com

National Geographic, www.nationalgeographic.com

Newsweek, www.newsweek.com

Time Magazine, www.time.com

Smithsonian Magazine, www.smithsonianmag.com

The Atlantic Monthly, www.theatlantic.com/ magazine

Wired, www.wired.com

For links to many additional resources, Arts & Letters Daily: www.aldaily.com

Also see: Gerald Graff, Cathy Birkenstein, and Russell Durst: They Say/I Say: The Moves that
Matter in Academic Writing, 2nd Edition. New York: W.W. Norton and Company, 2009.

Fiction, suggested authors: Julia Alvarez, Jane Austen, Charlotte/ Anne Bronté, Michael
Chabon, Charles Dickens, Jhumpa Lahiri, Toni Morrison, George Orwell, Edith Wharton

Key Topics and Controversies, Natural and Social Science:

Renewable Energy (Wind and Solar Power)
Big Data: Good or Bad?

Reliability of Scientific Findings

The Sharing Economy

Will New Technologies Create or Destroy Jobs?
Genetically Modified Foods

String Theory

The Higgs Boson/ the Large Hadron Collider
Disappearing Coral Reefs

Declining Bee Populations

Science and Social Science Authors: Daniel Kahneman, Malcolm Gladwell, Adam Grant,

Daniel Levitin, Brian Greene, Stephen Hawking, Lisa Randall

Note: If you are seeking additional resources for graphic-based questions, you may want to
work with Science sections from released ACTs. Although somewhat more challenging than
SAT data analysis questions overall, they nevertheless require many of the same skills tested
on the SAT, In addition to the tests in The Official ACT Prep Guide, several more authentic

exams are available online.

16

--- PAGE 16 ---
DERG RASS NT

eI Seige RS PRD ROI NA

RY
é

TERRES ERAN BA SN NEN NTE OS POON MER EARS,

EOLA LR

EPA REESE ERE

0 IONE EEA MEER MTOR IED OER LINE Ebi

Oe LO ERD RE ert VFA 4

Key Historical Movements and Figures:

The Revolutionary Period: Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, Alexander
Hamilton

The Abolitionist Movement: Frederick Douglass, William Lloyd Garrison, Henry Ward
Beecher, Harriet Beecher Stowe

Transcendentalism: Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry David Thoreau
The Civil War: Abraham Lincoln, Stephen Douglass, Daniel Webster

The Women’s Rights Movement: Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucretia Mott,
Angelina and Sarah Grimké (also active in the Abolitionist Movement)

The Progressive Movement and Muckrakers: Upton Sinclair, Jane Addams, Ida Tarbell,
Jacob Riis, WEB DuBois, Booker T. Washington

World Wars I and Hi: Woodrow Wilson (WWI), Franklin D. Roosevelt (WWI)

The Civil Rights Movement: Martin Luther King, Jr., Malcolm X, Fannie Lou Hamer, John F.
Kennedy

Historical Documents, Sources:
http:/ / www.ushistory.org /documents/

17

--- PAGE 17 ---
18

--- PAGE 18 ---
;
g
H
s
&
F
B;

i
}

RTO RK AA ALBEE

i
Fa
bf
é
$
z
z
é
&
E
=
4
¢
&

%
;
:
i

PTE ER SIN ATLAS Ab fay

EOLA EN MOEN SIN MCL NII IL NG LOSE DOR LEDS L EIDE ALAA BASS OLENA Bt LP LEGO Ah GPA RE Pb ALLE REY SEITE LENE DILL RAG I IAN AOE IEF FIA

Introduction to SAT Reading

The redesigned SAT contains one 65-minute reading section that will always be the first
section of the exam. It consists of four long single passages and one set of shorter paired
passages, accompanied by a total of 52 questions (9-11 questions per passage or paired
passage set) covering a wide range of topics.

The breakdown of passages is typically as follows:
¢ Fiction (1 passage, always first)
* Social science (1 passage)
* Natural science (2 passages)
* Historical Documents (Usually 1 set of paired passages)

Each passage or set of paired passages ranges in length from 500-750 words. Science and
social science passages may also include 1-2 related graphs or charts. In some instances, the
graphic(s) will clearly support an idea or phenomenon discussed in the passage. In other
cases, the relationship will be less clear-cut.

The majority of the Reading questions are text-based, but each test typically contains around
five graphic-based questions. Some of these questions are based on the graphic alone, while
others ask you to integrate information from the passage and the graphic.

What Does SAT Reading Test?

The SAT reading test is a literal comprehension test, but it is an argument comprehension test
as well. It tests not only the ability to find bits of factual information in a passage, but also
the capacity to understand how arguments are constructed and the ways in which specific
textual elements (e.g., words, phrases, punctuation marks) work together to convey ideas.
The focus is on moving beyond what a text says to understanding how the text says it. In
other words, comprehension is necessary but not sufficient.

The skill that the SAT requires is therefore something called “rhetorical reading.” Rhetoric is
the art of persuasion, and reading rhetorically simply means reading to understand an
author’s argument as well as the rhetorical role or function that various pieces of information
play in creating that argument.

Reading this way is an acquirable skill, not an innate aptitude. It just takes practice.

19

--- PAGE 19 ---
While the primary focus of the redesigned SAT is on having students use so-called
“evidence” to justify their responses - that is, requiring them to identify which section of a
passage provides the information necessary to answer a given question ~ the exam does still
test a number of other skills. The most important of these include drawing relationships
between specific wordings and general/abstract ideas; distinguishing between main ideas
and supporting evidence; understanding how specific textual elements such as diction (word
choice), syntax, and style convey meaning and tone; keeping track of multiple viewpoints and
understanding/ inferring relationships between arguments and perspectives; and recognizing
that it is possible for an author to agree with some aspects of an idea while rejecting others.

That might sound like an awful lot to manage, but don’t worry; we're going to break it down.
These skills are tested in various ways across a variety of different question types:

* Vocabulary-in-context questions test your ability to use context clues to identify
alternate meanings of common words.

¢ Big-picture questions test your understanding of the passage as a whole. They may
ask you to summarize, identify main points, or determine the purpose of a passage.

¢ Literal comprehension questions ask you to identify what the passage directly states.
¢ Inference questions ask you to identify what the passage suggests or indirectly states.
¢ Both literal comprehension and inference questions will frequently be followed by

supporting evidence questions, which require you to identify the specific lines
in the passage that provide the answer to the previous question.

¢ Extended reasoning questions ask you to apply ideas discussed in the passage to new
situations.

* Function or purpose questions ask you to identify the rhetorical role (e.g., support,
refute, criticize) that various pieces of information play within a passage.

¢ Rhetorical strategy and passage organization questions test your understanding of
passage structure and point of view.

* Tone and attitude questions test your understanding of how specific words or
phrases help establish an author's perspective.

¢ Paired passage questions test your ability to compare texts with different, often
conflicting, points of view, and to infer how each author would likely react to the
other’s point of view.

¢ Data analysis questions test your ability to interpret information presented in graph
or table form, and to determine whether and how it supports various pieces of

information in a passage.

Each chapter in this book is devoted to a specific type of question and is followed by exercises
that allow you to practice that particular skill.

20

--- PAGE 20 ---
2
5
j

RIT SISO eM ARRE I TA an

SRT IMAI E

iat AE et

ESN MP AN GARIGE ATT

RL aE RAS INEST

PAIRED PURSE AD EGAN MOOREA SNAG SPAREN IE PES LM ABBE DANGLE SOREN SNA E BARE SEL

2
$

EA NRE ONL OAL HD, Bt

} DN Ra ORAL ANAM 0, al) Bhagat spat? NES

Managing the Reading Test as a Whole

The 65 minutes you are given to complete the 52 questions on the Reading Test are both a
blessing and a curse. On one hand, you have more than an hour to read and answer questions
for just five passages. On the other hand, reading passage after passage for more than an hour
without interruption can start to feel like a slog. Even though you have a good amount of
time, you still want to use it as efficiently and effectively as possible. Regardless of whether
you're aiming for a 600 or an 800, your goal is simple: to correctly answer as many questions
as possible within the allotted time. You are under no obligation to read the passages and/or
answer the questions in the order in which they appear. In fact, you can divvy up those 65
minutes and 52 questions in any way you wish.

If you’re a strong reader across the board, or if you simply have a very strong aversion to
jumping around, you may find it easiest to read the passages and answer the questions in the
order they’re presented (skipping and possibly coming back to anything that seems too
confusing). If you have very pronounced strengths and weaknesses or consistently have
difficulty managing time on standardized tests, however, keep reading.

One way to ensure that you use your time most effectively is to do the passages in order of
most to least interesting or easiest to hardest. Working this way ensures that you'll pick up
easy points - points that you might not earn as easily if you encountered those questions after
struggling through a passage you hated. You won't get tired or frustrated early on, then
spend the rest of the section trying to make up for the time you lost struggling through a
difficult passage at the start. You might even finish the first couple of passages quickly, giving
you additional time to spend on more challenging material.

It’s true that this strategy requires you to spend about 10-15 seconds upfront skimming the
beginning of each passage and seeing which ones seem least painful, but that can often be a
worthwhile tradeoff.

If you don’t want to spend time trying to figure out which passages to start and end with, you
can come in with a plan of attack based on your strengths and weaknesses. If there’s a
particular type of passage that you consistently find easy, do it first. That way, you
automatically start with your strongest passage without having to waste time. Likewise, if
there’s a type of passage you consistently have trouble with, leave it for last. When you're
struggling through those last few questions, you can at least console yourself with the
knowledge that you're almost done.

Let's look at some possible sequences for working through passages.

If you excel in science and graph reading but dislike more humanities-based passages, for
example, you might prefer the following order:

Science

Science

Social Science

Paired Passages (usually Historical Documents)

Toe e NN Pp

Fiction

21

--- PAGE 21 ---
On the flip side, if you are strong in the humanities but find science passages and graphs
challenging, you might choose to read the passages in this order:

Fiction

Paired Passages (usually Historical Documents)

Social Science

Science

oF SP Ye

Science

There are, of course, many possible combinations, and you will most likely have to spend
some time experimenting to determine which order feels most comfortable to you.

Just as you should read the passages in an order that works to your advantage, you should
also answer questions in an order that allows you to leverage your skills to maximum effect.
To reiterate: although you should never leave questions blank, you do not need to devote
significant time to every question. In fact, you may be better off planning from the start to
guess on a certain number of questions. If you are not aiming for a perfect score, answering
all of the questions may actually make it more difficult for you to achieve your goal.

Think of it this way: most time problems come about not because people spend too much
time answering every question but rather because they spend too much time answering a
small number of very challenging questions. Then, they feel pressured and rush. As a result,
they miss easier questions they otherwise could have gotten right. If they were to eliminate
those five or so time-consuming questions completely, they would have far more time to
answer the remaining questions, and thus be considerably more likely to get them right. The
goal then becomes to ensure that all of the easier questions are answered first.

One factor that can make implementing this strategy challenging, however, is that there is no
way to predict where easy vs. hard questions will fall. A very difficult question may follow a
very straightforward one. You must therefore practice recognizing which questions you are
normally able to answer easily and which ones give you trouble so that you already have a
clear sense of where to focus your attention when you walk into the test.

While “easy” and “hard” are somewhat subjective, there are some types of questions ~ most
notably combined passage/graphic and Passage 1/Passage 2 relationship - that tend to be
both challenging and time consuming. If you are not aiming for a tippy-top score, you may
want to skip them and focus on more straightforward questions instead.

Unless you are absolutely set on trying to score 1600, keep in mind that you probably have
more wiggle room than you think. You do not need to answer every question correctly to
obtain a score that will make you a serious candidate at any number of selective colleges.

Furthermore, a high score on the somewhat more straightforward Writing and Language Test
can offset a so-so showing on the Reading Test. If you answer 41/44 questions correctly on
the Writing and Language Test, for example, you can incorrectly answer about 6 questions on
the Reading Test and still obtain an overall Verbal score of 750. And you can miss about 12
questions and still end up around 700.

22

--- PAGE 22 ---
i
j
5
;
i
y
i

AiR Ragged ha N BI AEINNE

a BREN peal 5 tree RT Na OE

So a ee aa

2
3
4
&
&
$

RENTON Eo PE NS FAINT SS aH RSS MG IEEE ILS a2 METI IS ERM HF

The Answer Isn’t Always [n the Passage

One of the great truisms of SAT prep is that “the answer is always in the passage,” but in
reality this statement is only half true: the information necessary to answer the questions is
always provided in the passage, but not necessarily the answer itself. It's a subtle but
important distinction.

The SAT tests the ability to draw relationships between specific wordings and general ideas,
so while the correct answer will always be supported by specific wording in the passage (which
you are sometimes responsible for identifying), the whole point is that you must make the
connection. That, in essence, is the test.

As a rule, therefore, the correct answers to most questions will usually not be stated word-for-
word in the text. In fact, if an answer repeats phrasing from the passage word-for-word, you
should approach that option very cautiously. The correct answer will usually refer to an idea
that has been discussed in the passage and that has simply been rephrased. Your job is to
determine that idea and identify the answer that rewords it using synonyms. Same idea,
different words.

Understanding Answer Choices

Although one or more incorrect answers may sound convincing, there is always a specific
reason - supported by the passage - that wrong answers are wrong. Often, they describe a
situation that could be true but that the passage does not explicitly indicate is true. They may
also employ relatively abstract language that many test-takers find confusing or difficult to
comprehend. That said, incorrect answers typically fall into the following categories:

* Off-topic

* Too broad (e.g., the passage discusses one scientist while the answer refers to
scientists)

* Too extreme (e.g., they include words such as never, always, or completely)

¢ Half-right, half-wrong (e.g., right words, false statement)

* Could be true but not enough information

* True for the passage as a whole, but not for the specific lines in question

¢ Factually true but not stated in the passage
On most questions, many test-takers find it relatively easy to eliminate a couple of answers
but routinely remain stuck between two plausible-sounding options. Typically, the incorrect
answer will fall into either the “could be true but not enough information” or the “half-right,

half-wrong” category. In such cases, you must be willing to read very carefully in order to
determine which answer the passage truly supports.

23

--- PAGE 23 ---
Understanding Line References

A line reference only tells you where a particular word or phrase is located - it does not tell
you that the answer will necessarily be in that line or set of lines. So, for example, a question
that reads, “The author uses digital and video offerings (line 35) as examples of...” is telling
you the phrase digital and video offerings is in line 35. The answer could be in line 25, but it’s
just as likely to be in line 23 or in line 27, or even in line 35.

In addition, the most important places in the passage, the ones that you need to pay the
most attention to, are not necessarily the ones indicated by the questions. Focusing
excessively on a particular set of lines can make you lose sight of the bigger picture.

At the other extreme, only a small section of a line reference may sometimes be relevant. In
fact, the longer the line reference, the lower the chance that all of it will be important.
There’s no sense spending time puzzling over eight or ten lines that you've carefully marked
off if all you need to focus on is the first sentence or a set of dashes.

Strategies for Reading Passages

One of the major challenges of SAT reading is that questions are arranged in two ways: first,
in rough chronological order of the passage (although you should note that answers to
supporting evidence questions may be found after the line reference in the following
question); and second, in non-chronological order for graph and chart questions.

In addition, some big picture (main idea) questions that appear either at the beginning or in
the middle of a question set may not provide line references. As a result, some jumping
around is unavoidable, If you can understand the gist of the author’s argument, though, you
will likely be able to identify some correct answers - even those to detail-based questions ~
without having to hunt through the passage. You will also find it easier to answer supporting
evidence questions because in many cases, you will already have a good idea of the
information the correct lines must include.

There are essentially two major ways to read passages. Regardless of which strategy you
choose, you should read the passage as quickly as you can while still absorbing the content.
Do your best to focus on the parts you understand, and try to avoid spending time puzzling
over confusing details (which may or may not ultimately be relevant) and repeatedly
rereading sections you do not immediately grasp.

The first option is to read the entire passage with the goal of understanding the big picture,
then answering the questions in one block after you are done reading. This strategy tends to
work best for people who have excellent focus and comprehension, and who are strong at
identifying and summarizing arguments.

Read the passage slowly until you figure out the point - usually at the end of the
introduction - and underline it. Then, focus on the first and last sentence of each paragraph
carefully, skimming through the body of each paragraph and circling major transitions,
“interesting” punctuation (e.g., colons, semicolons, dashes), and strong language. Finally,
read the conclusion carefully, paying particular attention to and underlining the last
sentence or two because the main point will often be restated at the end of the conclusion.

24

--- PAGE 24 ---
meiosis

RIA eg ae AERARREt MEI EE tal Ne TM a An DM EBLE NS

RANA TTT

2

&
i
&
g
§
q
2
i
g

Ea PONTE Nee OSE TIN ON IN A LEO NE A EAS ITI LEN BAO PEI

SEINE LES ANI ys se PE PIRES NI EER 8 ORE EEF LN GEO I ELE 0 SAIN ON NPE A AEE OGG GLE LIPS NEY NAL NOM, BELIEF TROT OTR

Working this way will allow you to create a mental map of the passage: the introduction and
conclusion will most likely give you the main point, and each topic sentence will generally
provide you with the point of the paragraph, allowing you to understand how it fits into the
argument as a whole. Then, when you're asked to think about the details, you'll already
understand the ideas that they support and have a sense of their purpose.

If you consistently spend too much time reading passages, you can try another version of
this approach. Read the introduction slowly until you figure out the point; then, read the first
and last sentence of each body paragraph carefully, skipping the information in between.
Finally, read the conclusion slowly and underline the last sentence or couple of sentences.
That way, you'll get the major points without losing time.

If your comprehension is outstanding, you can simply move on to the next section of the
passage (the place where the idea clearly changes) once you’ve grasped the point of any
particular section of the passage you happen to be reading - regardless of how long that
section may be. You can worry about the details when you go back.

The second option is to read the passage in sections, say a paragraph or two at a time,
answering the more straightforward line-reference questions as you read. When you turn to a
new passage, start by skimming through the questions. Notice which ones have specific lines
references, then go to the passage and mark off those lines in the passage. (Note: bracketing
lines is generally faster and more efficient than underlining.) Then, as you read the passage,
you can answer those questions as you come to them, keeping in mind that the answers to
some questions will not be located directly in the lines referenced, and that you may need
to read before or after in order to locate the necessary information.

This is often a good approach for people who difficulty recognizing main ideas, or who have
difficulty maintaining focus when they are confronted with too much information. Breaking
passages down into smaller chunks can make them seem more manageable.

This can also be a helpful strategy for people who are concerned about spending too much
reading and not having enough left over to comfortably answer all the questions. Knowing
that you've answered even three or four of the questions by the time you get done with the
passage can allow you to work more calmly through the remaining questions.

An important note about supporting evidence questions: If you choose to answer some of
the questions as you work through the passage, you need to be careful with supporting
evidence questions. They come in two types: ones in which the first question of the pair
contains a line reference, and ones in which the first question of the pair does not contain a
line reference.

When the first question of the pair does contain a line reference, you can probably answer
both questions as you read the passage. Pay close attention to the lines you use to determine
your answer to the first question; assuming you understand the passage, those lines will
likely be cited in the correct answer to the second question, allowing you to answer both
questions simultaneously. (Don’t worry, we're going to look at some examples of how to do
this a little later on, in Chapter 4.) For this reason, you should make sure to mark both
questions in this type of pair as you look through the questions. If you overlook the
supporting evidence question initially, you'll end up having to backtrack after you’re done
with the passage and re-locate information you've already found.

25

--- PAGE 25 ---
On the other hand: when the first question of a supporting evidence pair does not contain a
line reference, you should not normally try to answer both questions as you read, and you
should not mark the line references in the second question. If you attempt to pay attention
to all those various places and connect them to the first question as you read, you will almost
certainly become confused.

Answering the questions as you read the passage can work well if you are a strong reader,
but it does have some potential drawbacks. Reading passages in bits can cause you to get lost
in the details and lose sight of the argument. So while this method can be effective if you tend
to have trouble understanding the big picture, it cannot fully compensate for that weakness.
Strategies allow you to leverage the skills you do have, but they cannot substitute for the ones
you don’t. To be sure, it is possible to get many - or even all - of the questions right working
this way. It’s just that the process will be much more tedious and open to error.

You might be wondering why we're not going to seriously address the possibility of skipping
the passage entirely and just jumping to the questions. If time is a serious problem for you,
you might think that this option represents your best shot at finishing on time. After all, those
passages are long! While I don’t dispute that this strategy can be effective for the right person,
I do not normally recommend it. The main problem is that it does not take into account what
the SAT is actually testing, namely relationships between ideas - particularly between main
ideas and supporting details. In order to determine relationships between ideas, you need
context for them, which is very difficult to determine if you’re reading isolated bits and
pieces. You therefore run the serious risk of misunderstanding the entire passage.

Moreover, unless you are able to split your attention and glean main ideas at the same time
you are hunting for answers to detail-based questions (an extremely sophisticated skill), you
will have no way of using the big picture to “shortcut” detail-based questions. You are likely
to spend considerable time hunting through the passage, rereading aimlessly as you try to
figure out where to look. What is intended to be a time-saving strategy thus ends up
requiring more time than would have been involved in simply reading the passage.

If you have a serious time problem, you are much better off simply reading a few key places -
introduction, topic sentences, conclusion - so that you at least have a gist of what the passage
is talking about when you look at the questions.

Skimming Effectively Means Knowing What to Focus On

If you ask those rare lucky people who can race through the Reading test in half an hour how
they finish so quickly, they'll probably shrug and tell you that they’re just reading the
passages and answering the questions. What most highly skilled readers often do not
recognize, though, is that their “naturally” fast reading is actually the result of a combination
of specific skills. But because expert readers generally perform those skills subconsciously,
they can’t explain how they do what they do or teach someone else to do it. The good news is
that those skills can be learned. You probably won't become a champion speed-reader
overnight, but you can learn to read more quickly and effectively.

Brute speed, no doubt, is a useful thing to have, but it is not the whole story. In reality, the
key is to read efficiently. If you understand main ideas, you can often use a general “bird’s
eye” view to answer some questions without even looking back at the passage, leaving you
plenty of time to worry about questions that require more time.

26

--- PAGE 26 ---
ea AEA 8

z
fy
é
x

SORES ONY

Sige BRORARERA RD tN Ne LEN i Lt SIRE RIE Hi

i

=
4
&
é
2
i
$
t
i

LISS I BECO CONAN nee a

NSLS ato tinea DES NF

ELE NENT 9 SEMEN A OSS PANNE A Sag GIN

One of the most common mistakes students make is to read as if every sentence were equally
important. As a result, when they encounter something they don’t understand, they assume it
must be crucial and read it again. And if they still don’t understand it, they read again. And
then again, and again. Before they know it, they’ve spent almost a minute rereading a single
sentence. When they finally move on, they’re not only confused and frustrated (which makes
it harder to concentrate), but they’ve also lost sight of what the passage is about.

What's more, when most people skim through a passage, they simply try to read everything
faster, with the result that they don’t understand the passage as more than a string of vaguely
related sentences. When they look at the questions, they have only a fuzzy idea of what they
just read. They haven’t focused on the key places indicating main ideas and concepts, so
they’re often perplexed when they encounter big-picture questions that ask about the passage
as a whole. And because they’ve just been worrying about each individual piece of
information, they have difficulty thinking about where information would logically be
located when confronted with questions without line references.

Effective skimming involves reading selectively. Some sections are read very slowly, while
others are glanced over or even skipped. Reading this way requires a lot more focus, but it is
also much faster and, when done properly, improves comprehension. But in order to know
what to read slowly and what to skip, you must be able to recognize what is important.

As a general rule, authors are pretty clear about the parts of their writing that they want you
to pay attention to. If they’re really generous, they’Il even come right out and tell you what
the point is. Even if they’re not quite that blatant, they usually make a decent effort to tell you
what's important ~ if not through words, then through punctuation.

So first, you should circle any words or phrases that indicate the author is making a point,
e.g., the point, goal, or intention, along with the word important and any of its synonyms
(significant, crucial, key) and any italicized words. If you see one of these terms in the middle of
a paragraph as you're racing through a passage, slow down, circle it, and read that section
carefully. If the author says it’s important, it’s important. There’s no trick.

Second, you need to learn to recognize when an argument changes or when new and
important information is introduced: transitions such as however, therefore, in fact; “unusual”
punctuation such as dashes, italics, and colons; strong language such as only and never; and
“explanation” words such as reason are “clues” that tell you to pay attention. If one of these
elements appears in or near a line reference, the answer will typically be located close by.

If you are able to do so while still absorbing the meaning of the passage, you should mark
these key elements as you read so you'll know what to pay attention to when you go back.

To be clear, you don't need to circle every last and and but. Rather, the goal is to use the
author's “clues” to identify the major points of the argument.

If, on the other hand, you feel that looking for transitions will interfere with your
comprehension, then you should not worry about them when you read through the passage
for the first time. It is far more important that you understand what you are reading. When
you go back to answer the questions, however, you do need to take transitions into account
because correct answers will frequently be located right around them.

In the passage on the following page, key elements are in bold. The chart on p. 205 provides
a full list of key words, phrases, and punctuation, as well as their functions.

27

--- PAGE 27 ---
The following passage is adapted from “Makerspaces,
Hackerspaces, and Community Scale Production in
Detroit and Beyond,” © 2013 by Sean Ansanelli.

During the mid-1980s, spaces began to emerge
across Europe where computer hackers could convene
for mutual support and camaraderie. In the past few
years, the idea of fostering such shared, physical spaces

5 has been rapidly adapted by the diverse and growing
community of “makers,” who seek to apply the idea of
“hacking” to physical objects, processes, or anything
else that can be deciphered and improved upon,

A hackerspace is described by hackerspaces.org as

40 a “community-operated physical space where people
with common interests, often in computers, technology,
science, digital art or electronic art, can meet, socialize,
and/or collaborate.” Such spaces can vary in size,
available technology, and membership structure (some

15 being completely open), but generally share community-
oriented characteristics. Indeed, while the term
“hacker” can sometimes have negative connotations,
modern hackerspaces thrive off of community,
openness, and assimilating diverse viewpoints ~ these

20 often being the only guiding principles in otherwise
informal organizational structures.

In recent years, the city of Detroit has emerged
as a hotbed for hackerspaces and other DIY
(“Do-It-Yourself”) experiments. Several hackerspaces

25 can already be found throughout the city and several
more are currently in formation. Of course, Detroit’s
altractiveness for such projects can be partially
attributed to cheap real estate, which allows aspiring
hackers to acquire ample space for experimentation,

30 Some observers have also described this kind of making
and tinkering as embedded in the DNA of Detroit’s
residents, who are able to harness substantial
intergenerational knowledge and attract like-minded
individuals.

35 _Hackerspaces (or “makerspaces”) can be found in
more commercial forms, but the vast majority of spaces
are self-organized and not-for-profit. For example, the
OmniCorp hackerspace operates off member fees to
cover rent and new equipment, from laser cutters to

40 welding tools. OmniCorp also hosts an “open hack
night” every Thursday in which the space is open to
the general public. Potential members are required to
attend at least one open hack night prior to a consensus
vote by the existing members for admittance; no

45 prospective members have yet been denied.

A visit to one of OmniCorp’s open hack nights
reveals the vast variety of activity and energy existing
in the space. In the main common room alone, activities
range from experimenting with sound installations and

50 learning to program Arduino boards to building
speculative “oloid” shapes ~ all just for the sake of it.
With a general atmosphere of mutual support,
participants in the space are continually encouraged
to help others,

55 — One of the most active community-focused initiatives
in the city is the Mt. Elliot Makerspace. Jeff Sturges,
former MIT Media Lab Fellow and Co-Founder of
OmniCorp, started the Mt. Elliot project with the aim of
replicating MIT’s Fab Lab model on a smaller, cheaper

60 scale in Detroit. “Fab Labs” are production facilities that
consist of a small collection of flexible computer-
controlled tools that cover several different scales and
various materials, with the aim to make “almost
anything” (including other machines). The Mt. Elliot

65 Makerspace now offers youth-based skill development
programs in eight areas; Transportation, Electronics,
Digital Tools, Wearables, Design and Fabrication, Food,
Music, and Arts. The range of activities is meant to
provide not only something for everyone, but a well-

70 rounded base knowledge of making to all participants.

While the center receives some foundational support,
the space also derives significant support from the local
community. Makerspaces throughout the city connect
the space’s youth-based programming directly to

75 school curriculums.

The growing interest in and development of
hacker/makerspaces has been explained, in part, as a
result of the growing maker movement. Through the
combination of cultural norms and communication

80 channels from open source production as well as
increasingly available technologies for physical
production, amateur maker communities have developed
in virtual and physical spaces.

Publications such as Wired are noticing the

85 transformative potential of this emerging movement
and have sought to devote significant attention to its
development. Chief editor Chris Anderson recently
published a book entitled Makers, in which he proclaims
that the movement will become the next Industrial

90 Revolution. Anderson argues such developments will
allow for a new wave of business opportunities by
providing mass-customization rather than mass-
production.

The transformative potential of these trends goes

95 beyond new business opportunities or competitive
advantages for economic growth. Rather, these trends
demonstrate the potential to actually transform
economic development models entirely.

28

--- PAGE 28 ---
:
8
é
¢

een

saline tapas ROAR no

AAAS nahi nen

pie alia on ter rr nn

r
z
&
%
¢
2
3
:
i

SA NER IOLA at BIN EEN

The author suggests that a reduction in fossil
fuel subsidies could lead to

A) greater cooperation among nations.
B) decreased economic stability.
C) higher transportation costs.

D)

Using Key Words: Managing Questions Without Line References

Just as you must be able to recognize key words and phrases within passages, so must you be
able to recognize key words and phrases within questions.

This is a crucial skill for questions that are not accompanied by line references. Although
many of these questions will be accompanied by supporting evidence questions that direct
you to look at specific places in the passage, you will also encounter detail-based questions in
which line references are not provided in either the question or the answer choices. In such
cases, you must be able to locate the necessary information efficiently by using the wording of
the question for guidance.

For example, a passage about sustainable energy could contain a question like the following:

more sustainable infrastructure.

This question is relatively straightforward, but it gives no indication of where in the passage
the answer might be located. If you happen to remember the answer, you're in luck. If you
don’t remember it, however, you must know how to find the information in a way that does
not involve staring at the passage and aimlessly (and increasingly nervously) skimming
random parts of it.

The first step is to identify and underline the key word(s) or phrase in the question, That
word or phrase indicates the specific focus of the question, i.e., the topic, and almost always
follows indicates / conveys or suggests /iniplies. Here, the key phrase is fossil fuel subsidies.

Then, you should go back to the passage to skim for that word or phrase, pulling your index
finger down the page as you scan. This may seem like a minor detail, but in fact it is
extremely important: your finger establishes a physical connection between your eye and the
page, keeping you focused and reducing the chance that you will overlook key information.

As you skim, you should pay particular attention to the first (topic) and last sentence of
each paragraph because they are most likely to include key points. Even if they don’t provide
the information you need to answer a question, they will often provide important clues about
where the necessary information is located.

Each time the key word or phrase appears, stop and read a sentence or two above and below
for context. If that section of the passage does not answer the question, move on and check
the next place the key word/ phrase shows up. Your goal is to avoid falling into a loop of
reading and rereading a section, searching for information that isn’t there.

29

--- PAGE 29 ---
How to Work Through Questions with Line References

While your approach will vary depending on the specific question, in general I recommend
the following strategy:

1) Read the question slowly.

Put your finger on each word of the question as you read it. Otherwise, you may miss key
information, and every letter of every word counts.

When you’re done, take a second or two to make sure you know exactly what the question is
asking. If it is is phrased in an even slightly convoluted manner, rephrase it in your own
words in a more straightforward way until you’re clear on what you're looking for. If
necessary, jot down the rephrased version.

This is not a minor step. If, for example, a question asks you the purpose of a sentence, you
must reread it with the goal of understanding what role the sentence plays within the
argument. If you reread it with a different goal, such as understanding what the sentence is
literally saying, you can’t work toward answering the question that’s actually being asked.

2) Go back to the passage and reread the lines given in the question. If the question
seems to call for it, read from a sentence or two above to a sentence or two below.

Purpose/function questions often require more context and, as a result, you should be
prepared to read both before and after the line reference. The answers to most other question
types are usually found within the lines referenced, but there are exceptions. If the line
reference begins or ends halfway through a sentence, however, make sure you back up or
keep reading so that you cover the entire sentence in which it appears. If a line reference
begins close to the beginning of a paragraph, you should automatically read from the first
sentence of the paragraph because it will usually give you the point of the paragraph.

There is unfortunately no surefire way to tell from the wording of a question whether the
information necessary to answer that question is included in the line reference. If you read the
lines referenced and have an inordinate amount of difficulty identifying the correct answer,
or you get down to two answers and are unable to identify which one is correct, that’s often a
sign that the answer is actually located somewhere else. Go back to the passage, and read the
surrounding sentences.

For long line references: a long line reference is, paradoxically, a signal that you don’t need
to read all of the lines. Usually the information you need to answer the question will be in
either the first sentence or two, the last sentence or two, or in a section with key punctuation
(dashes, italics, colon). Start by focusing on those places and forgetting the rest; they’ll almost
certainly give you enough to go on.

3) Answer the question in your own words, and write that answer down.
This step is not necessary on very straightforward questions, but it can be a big help on
questions that require multiple steps of logic, particularly Passage 1/Passage 2 relationship

questions. Writing things down keeps you focused, reminds you what you're looking for, and
prevents you from getting distracted by plausible-sounding or confusing answer choices.

30

--- PAGE 30 ---
ah Sg RNR OBL pee AE RANE

aR ace ea te pth ny ane REST

3
‘
2

MS LRM AE SMAI THEMED RAT READy

Tae Nr BIN EN ASC EO

_amomet ccd yt ne arreeonnsiet wl Poet wa Rey one APRON an 2 OETA NOME NN AOS MERON LIE RN SN bP Ne MANS SE AE MADAM MANN ANE care Ric Onn AME a

The goal is not to write a dissertation or come up with the exact answer in the test. You can be
very general and should spend no more than a few seconds on this step; a couple of words
scribbled down in semi-legible handwriting will suffice. The goal is to identify the general
information or idea that the correct answer must include. Again, make sure you’re answering
the question that’s actually being asked, not just summarizing the passage.

If you do this step, you should spend no more than a few seconds on it. If you can’t come up
with anything, skip to step #4.

4) Read the answers carefully, A) through D), in order.

if there’s an option that contains the same essential idea you put down, choose it because it's
almost certainly right. If it makes you feel better, though, you can read through the rest of the
answers in order to be certain. Just make sure you don’t get distracted by options that sound
vaguely plausible and start second-guessing yourself.

If you can’t identify the correct answer...
5) Cross out the answers that are absolutely wrong.

Try not to spend more than a couple of seconds on each answer choice. If an option clearly
makes no sense in context of the question or passage, get rid of it.

When you cross out an answer, put a line through the entire thing; do not cross out the
letter alone. As far as you're concerned, it no longer exists.

Leave any answer that’s even a remote possibility, even if you’re not quite sure how it relates
to the passage or question. Remember: your understanding of an answer has no effect on
whether that answer is right or wrong, You should never cross out an answer because
you're confused or haven’‘t really considered what it’s saying.

If you get down to two answers, go back to the passage again and start checking them out.
Whatever you do, do not just sit and stare at them. The information you need to answer the
question is in the passage, not in your head.

When you're stuck between two answers, there are several ways to decide between them.

First, go back to the passage and see if there are any major transitions or strong language you
missed the first time around; you may have been focusing on the wrong part of the line
reference, or you may not have read far enough before/after the line reference. If that is the
case, the correct answer may become clear once you focus on the necessary information.

The correct answer will usually contain a synonym for a key word in the passage, so if a
remaining choice includes this feature, you should pay very close attention to it.

You can also pick one specific word or phrase in an answer to check out when you go back to
the passage. For example, if the lines in question focus on a single scientist and the answer
choice mentions scientists, then the answer is probably beyond the scope of what can be
inferred from the passage. Likewise, if an answer focuses on a specific person, thing, or idea
not mentioned in the lines referenced, there's also a reasonable chance that it's off-topic.

31

--- PAGE 31 ---
Remember: the more information an answer choice contains, the greater the chance that
some of that information will be wrong.

Finally, you can reiterate the main point of the passage or paragraph, and think about which
answer is most consistent with it. That answer will most likely be correct.

6) If you’re still stuck, see whether there’s a choice that tooks like a right answer.

If you still can’t figure out the answer, you need to switch from reading the passage to
“reading” the test. Working this way will allow you to make an educated guess, even if
you're not totally sure what's going on. Does one of the answers you're left with use
extremely strong or limiting language (no one, always, ever)? There’s a pretty good chance it’s
wrong. Does one of them refer to the topic in the plural, whereas the passage has a narrow
focus? It’s probably too broad.

In addition, ask yourself whether all of the answers you're left with actually make sense in
context of both the test and the real world. For example, an answer stating that no scientific
progress has been made in recent years is almost certain to be wrong. Yes, you should be very
careful about relying on your outside knowledge of a subject, but it’s okay to use common
sense too.

7) If you're still stuck, skip it or guess.

You can always come back to it later if you have time. And if you're still stuck later on, you
need to pick your favorite letter and fill it in. You should never leave anything blank.

Starting on the next page, we're going to look at some examples.

32

--- PAGE 32 ---
au Cig ra eat heyy

saratoga

eR ARO ce I HNL eS et

pes Rese A MINIS

ord

i
z
3
&

&
g
s
g
4
g
;
5
£
&
3
¥
&
é
i
:
F
5
$
£
;

i
i
5
:
3
4
4
5
5
$

AS POPPON, Paley

eee

The sharing economy is a little like online
shopping, which started in America {5 years ago. At
first, people were worried about security. But having
made a successful purchase from, say, Amazon, they

5 felt safe buying elsewhere. Similarly, using Airbnb or

10

45

20

25

30

35

40

a car-hire service for the first time encourages people to
try other offerings. Next, consider eBay. Having started
out as a peer-to-peer marketplace, it is now dominated
by professional “power sellers” (many of whom started
out as ordinary eBay users). The same may happen with
the sharing economy, which also provides new
opportunities for enterprise. Some people have bought
cars solely to rent them out, for example. Incumbents
are getting involved too, Avis, a car-hire firm, has a share
in a sharing rival. So do GM and Daimler, two carmakers.
In the future, companies may develop hybrid models,
listing excess capacity (whether vehicles, equipment or
office space) on peer-to-peer rental sites. In the past,
new ways of doing things online have not displaced the
old ways entirely. But they have often changed them.
Just as internet shopping forced Walmart and Tesco to
adapt, so online sharing will shake up transport, tourism,
equipment-hire and more.

The main worry is regulatory uncertainty. Will
room-4-renters be subject to hotel taxes, for example?
In Amsterdam officials are using Airbnb listings to
track down unlicensed hotels. In some American cities,
peer-to-peer taxi services have been banned after
lobbying by traditional taxi firms. The danger is that
although some rules need to be updated to protect
consumers from harm, incumbents will try to destroy
competition. People who rent out rooms should pay tax,
of course, but they should not be regulated like a Ritz-
Carlton hotel. The lighter rules that typically govern
bed-and-breakfasts are more than adequate. The sharing
economy is the latest example of the internet’s value to
consumers. This emerging model is now big and
disruptive enough for regulators and companies to have
woken up to it. That is a sign of its immense potential.
It is time to start caring about sharing.

The author suggests that the sharing economy
(line 11) could eventually

A) grow larger than the traditional economy.

B) be controlled by a particular group of sellers.
C) rely mostly on hybrid models.

D) depend exclusively on former eBay users.

The first thing to remember about a question like this is that the line reference is telling us
only that the phrase sharing economy ~ the key phrase - appears in line 11. The information we
need to answer the question is not necessarily in line 11. Let’s start by reading the entire

sentence in which the phrase appears:

The same may happen with the sharing economy, which also provides new

opportunities for enterprise.

Unfortunately, we don’t really get much information from this sentence. It tells us that the
same may happen, but we don’t actually know what “the same” is,

33

--- PAGE 33 ---
In order to figure out what the sate refers to, we need to back up some more and read the
previous couple of sentences as well:

Next, consider eBay. Having started out as a peer-to-peer marketplace, it is now
dominated by professional “power sellers” (many of whom started out as ordinary
eBay users).

Now we're getting someplace. The passage is telling us that the sharing economy as a whole
could, like eBay, eventually become dominated (=controlled) by professional “power sellers”
(=a particular group of sellers). So the answer is B).

Notice that the correct answer takes the wording of the passage and rephrases it in more
general terms. The specific people mentioned in the passage (power sellers) become the much
more general ” particular group of sellers.”

Notice also that if we had started reading at line 10 or 11 and kept going from there, we
would never have found the answer in the passage. We might have eventually gotten to it by
process of elimination, but the process would have been much less straightforward.

If the method described above seems like a reasonable - not to mention simpler - way to
work, great, This book will provide you with numerous ways to help you figure things out on
your own and reduce your reliance on the answer choices.

You might, however, be thinking something like, “Well you make it seem easy enough, but I
would probably get confused if I tried to figure that out on my own.” Or perhaps you're
thinking something more along the lines of, “Ew... that seems like way too much work, Can't
I just look at the answer choices?” So for you, here goes. One by one, we're going to consider
the answer choices - very, very carefully.

A) grow larger than the traditional economy.

No, this answer is completely off-topic. It might sound reasonable, but there is no information
about how the sharing economy compares to the traditional economy, either now or in the
future. In fact, the phrase traditional economy never even appears. So A) is out.

B) be controlled by a particular group of sellers.

The “vague” answer. As a matter of fact, the phrasing suggests that the answer is correct -
even in the absence of any other information. Again, if you started reading in line 10 or 11
and never backed up, you probably wouldn’t find the information indicating that it was right.
As discussed above, this answer rephrases the idea that a professional group of sellers (ie., “a
particular group”) could eventually dominate the entire sharing economy, just as they now
dominate eBay.

C) rely mostly on hybrid models.

Half-right, half-wrong. This answer takes a random word from the passage and uses it to
create an answer that could sound either vaguely plausible or confusing (especially if you
don’t know what a hybrid is), but does not answer the question. The passage does indicate
that some companies may develop hybrid models to list their inventory; it does not, however,
suggest in any way that the sharing economy will come to rely mostly on hybrid models.

34

--- PAGE 34 ---
i
5
5
4
3
i
H

STONE AOS RD

F
3
5
Hi
%
é
é
x
%
i
é
if

Ea SPO TOR Ne TARA DOE IE EOS 6 PAIR AONE ARUN MIN NIG DYEING

SB Hage

A hybrid, by the way, is something that is created by combining parts from two sources. For
example, a hybrid car is a car that contains both a gasoline engine and an electric engine,
either of which can be used to power it.

D) depend exclusively on former eBay users.

First off, the extreme word exclusively is a big warning sign that this answer is probably
wrong, so you should be suspicious of it from the start. It's true that the author does mention
eBay users right before the key phrase, but there’s no direct relationship between the two
things. The author is simply pointing out that many of the “power sellers” who eventually
came to dominate eBay started out as regular users. We cannot in any way infer that the
sharing economy as a whole will depend only on former eBay users (“power sellers” or
otherwise). That is an interpretation that goes far beyond what the passage supports.

Besides, if you think about it logically, this answer doesn’t really make sense. Even if you
don’t know anything about the sharing economy, the passage indicates that it involves a
variety of companies in different fields (Amazon, Airbnb, GM). The idea that the sharing
economy could depend only on former eBay users is completely at odds with that fact.

If you do know some basic things about the sharing economy, you can think of it this way:
correct answers must always be supported by the passage, but they must also correspond to
reality - many of the passages on the SAT are connected to current trends, debates, and
controversies, and as a result, correct answers must reflect real-world facts.

To be clear: factually correct answers are not necessarily right, but factually incorrect
answers are essentially guaranteed to be wrong.

35

--- PAGE 35 ---
General Tips for Reading Prep
And now, before we get started for real, some tidbits of test-prep wisdom:
lf you’re not in the habit of reading things written for educated adults, start. Now.

If you’re unsure where to begin, check out Arts & Letters Daily (http://www.aldaily.com),
which has links to dozens of publications written at SAT level and above. You cannot,
however, read passively and expect your score to magically rise. Rather, you must actively
and consistently practice the skills introduced in this book. Circle/ underline the point, major
transitions, and words that reveal tone; pay close attention to the introduction and conclusion
for the topic and the author's opinion (see how quickly you can get the gist); notice when
words are used in non-literal ways; and practice summarizing arguments briefly. The more
you develop these skills independently, the easier it will become to apply them to the test.

Outside knowledge does matter.

One of the most frequently repeated truisms about the SAT is that you have to forget all of
your outside knowledge and just worry about what's in the passage. That’s mostly true... but
not completely. First, just to be clear, an answer can be both factually correct and wrong if
that particular fact is not discussed in the passage. That’s what most people mean when they
say to forget about outside knowledge. The reality, however, is that reading does not exist in
a vacuum. It is always dependent upon ideas and debates that exist outside of the SAT, The
more you know about the world, the more easily you'll be able to understand what you're
reading. And if you see an answer you know is factually correct, it can’t hurt to check it first.

Read exactly what’s on the page, in order, from left to right.

This piece of advice may seem overwhelmingly obvious, but I cannot stress how important it
is. When people feel pressured, they tend to start glomming onto random bits of information
without fully considering the context. Although it is not necessary to read every word of a
passage to get the gist of it, skipping around randomly is unlikely to help you either! Pay
attention to what the author is telling you to pay attention to: when you see italics or
words/phrases like important or the point is, you need to slow down and go word by word.
Put your finger on the page, and bracket or underline as you read; the physical connection
between your eye and your hand will force you to focus in a way you wouldn’t if you were
just looking at the page. You're also far less likely to overlook key information.

Be as literal as you possibly can.

While your English teacher might praise you for your imaginative interpretations, the College
Board will not. Before you can understand the function of a piece of information or make a
reasonable inference about it, you have to understand exactly what it’s saying - otherwise,
you'll have a faulty basis for your reasoning. When you sum things up, stick as closely as
possible to the language of the passage. People often get themselves into trouble because they
think that there’s a particular way they’re supposed to interpret passages that they just don’t
“get,” when in reality they’re not supposed to interpret anything. In short, worry about what
the author is actually saying, not what she or he might be trying to say.

36

--- PAGE 36 ---
g
@
&
3
¥
&
3
£
i
2
2
f
E
%
g
i

ALE PRT EERE INI

SPIRES GO WSR SAE TO 5 SHEMET AA NO REBRANDING LEER,

TN,

Answering SAT Reading questions is a process.

Working through Reading questions is sometimes a process of trial-and-error. You make an
assumption based on how texts are usually put together and how the test is typically
constructed, and much of the time it’Tl turn out to be right (it is a standardized test, after all). If
you work from the understanding that main ideas are often stated in the conclusion, for
example, you may sometimes be best served by looking at a set of lines at the end of the
passage first. In other instances, it may make more sense to focus on a key word and start
halfway through the passage.

When your initial assumption doesn’t pan out, then your job is to reexamine your original
assumption and work through the answers one-by-one, trying to figure out what you
overlooked the first time around. If you’re a strong reader willing to approach the exam with
the attitude that you can reason your way systematically through each question, you'll
eventually hit on the answer. Yes, this does take some time, but if you can get through most
of the questions quickly, having to slow down occasionally won’t make much of an impact.
No, working this way is not easy to do when you’re under pressure, but it does get results.

Draw a line through the entire answer, not just the letter.

Your goal is to deal with the smallest amount of information possible at any given time, and
looking at answers you've already eliminated is an unnecessary distraction. If you get down
to one option and it doesn’t seem to work, you can always erase the lines, but only if you...

Always work in pencil.

It’s a lot harder to reconsider answer choices when you've crossed them out in ink.
Flexibility is key.

To obtain a very high score, you need to be able to adapt your approach to the question at
hand. People who insist on approaching every question the same way tend to fall short of
their goals, while those who start out scoring in the stratosphere tend to adjust automatically
(even if they think they’re just reading the passage and answering the question every time).
Sometimes you'll be able to answer a question based on your general understanding of the
passage and won't need to reread anything. Sometimes you'll be able to go back to the
passage, answer the question on your own, and then easily identify the correct answer when
you look at the choices. Other times the answer will be far less straightforward and you'll
have to go back and forth between the passage and the questions multiple times, eliminating
answers as you go. Yet other times it might make more sense for you to begin by looking at
the answer choices and eliminating those that are clearly wrong, then go back to the passage
and seeing which remaining choice best fits. It’s up to you to stay flexible and find the
strategy that will get you to the answer most easily. For that reason, | have done my best,
whenever possible, to offer multiple ways of approaching a given question.

The path to a perfect score is not linear.
Whereas math and writing scores can often be improved those last 100 or so points if you
spend time internalizing just a few more key rules, the same cannot be said for reading. If you

want a 750+ score, you cannot skip steps and start guessing or skimming through answers ~
you'll keep making just enough mistakes to hurt yourself. The SAT is a standardized test: if

37

--- PAGE 37 ---
you keep approaching it the same way, you'll keep getting the same score. It’s designed to
work that way. If you want your score to change radically, you have to approach the test in a
radically different way. Raising your score is also not just about how much practice you do: it
does not matter how well you know the test if you do not fully understand what you are
reading. Getting into the right mindset can take five minutes or five months, but until you’ve
absorbed it, your score will probably stay more or less the same.

Don’t rush.

I took the SAT twice in high school: the first time, I raced through the reading section,
answering questions mostly on instinct, not thinking anything through, and finishing every
section early. I was an incredibly strong reader and even recognized one of the passages from
a book I'd read for pleasure, but I got a 710.

The second time I understood what I was up against: I broke down every single question,
worked through it step-by-step, wrote out my reasoning process, and worked every question
out as meticulously as if it were a math problem. It was one of the most exhausting things I'd
ever done, and when I stumbled out of the exam room, I had absolutely no idea how I'd
scored. I'd literally been focusing so hard I hadn't left myself the mental space to worry about
how I was doing. Working that way was hard, but it got me an 800.

Summoning that level of focus is not easy. It’s also terrifying because you don’t have the
“well, [ maybe didn’t try as hard as I could have” excuse. If you bomb, you have nowhere to
put the blame. If you have excellent comprehension and can stand to do it, though, working
that precisely is almost foolproof. It might take longer than you're used to in the beginning,
but the more you go through the process, the more accurate you'll become and the less time
you'll take. Skipping steps might save you time, but your score will suffer as a result.

Understand what the College Board wants.

Every SAT passage has two authors: the author of the individual passage, and the test-writers
at the College Board. The highest scorers are often able to use a combination of close reading
skills and knowledge about the test itself (themes, biases, types of answers likely to be
correct), and they are able to employ both of those skills as needed in order to quickly identify
the answer choices most likely to be correct and then check them out for real.

When I was in high school and uncertain about an answer, I trained myself to always ask,
“What would the test writers consider correct?” It didn’t matter that I couldn’t put the
patterns into words then. The point was that I was able to convince myself that what I
personally thought was irrelevant. To score well, you have to think of the test in terms of
what the College Board wants - not what you want. You have to abandon your ego
completely and approach the test with the mindset that the College Board is always right and
what you think doesn’t matter. Then, once you've reached your goal, you can put the test out of
your mind and never have to worry about it again (or at least until your own children take it).

The ability to do this is really important: occasionally the logic on certain questions will not be
airtight. In those instances, you need to be able to consider the choices on their own and ask
which one looks most like the sort of answer that is usually correct. It's not fair that the test
writers can get away with being sloppy, but if it happens, you need to be prepared.

38

--- PAGE 38 ---
Re tes

indigo screener

iC PRORA Enh Stn

SRSA PBN

ieee in ect

H
3

2
:

5
3
4

a
i
3
:

l

i
4
s
t
4
t
g

Be willing to consider that the test might break its own “rules.”

For example, you can usually assume that answers containing extreme language such as
always, never, awe, incomprehensible, impossible, etc. are incorrect and cross them off as soon as
you see them. But you can’t always assume that a particular pattern holds without carefully
considering what the passage is actually saying. Correct answers will very occasionally
contain this type of phrasing. If you’re trying to score 800 or close to it, you need to stay open
to the possibility that an answer containing one of those words could on occasion be correct.

General patterns are just that: general. That means you will sometimes encounter exceptions.

Fit the answer to the passage, not the passage to the answer.

If an answer could only sort of kind of maybe possibly be true if you read the passage in a very
specific way, it’s not right. Don’t try to justify anything that isn’t directly supported by specific
wording in the passage.

Every word in the answer choice counts.

One incorrect word in an answer choice is enough to make the entire answer wrong. It
doesn’t matter how well the rest of the answer works; it doesn’t matter how much you like
the answer or think it should be right. If the author of the passage is clearly happy about a
new scientific finding and an answer says express skepticism about a recent finding, that answer
is wrong. The fact that the phrase a recent finding might have appeared in the passage is
irrelevant. On the other hand...

Just because information is in a passage doesn’t mean it’s important.

One of the things the SAT tests is the ability to recognize important information and ignore
irrelevant details. Reading SAT passages is not about absorbing every last detail but rather
about understanding what you need to focus on and what you can let go. And that means...

Keep moving.

In my experience, students often encounter time problems because they either 1) get hung up
on a section of the passage that they find confusing ~ a part that sometimes turns out to be
irrelevant - and waste a lot of time rereading it; or 2) get stuck between two answer choices
and sit there staring at them. To avoid falling into one of these traps, push yourself to keep
moving. Go back to the passage and check out a specific aspect of one of the answers, circle
things, write down what you know, or cross things out that clearly don’t make sense. Doing
something is better than doing nothing. Furthermore...

lf something confuses you, ignore it and focus on what you do understand.

You have a limited amount of time to get through each section, and that means you need to
be constantly figuring things out. Skip around. If you don’t know how to work through a
problem, you need to leave it and work on something you can answer. It doesn’t matter if you
have to leave a couple of the most time-consuming questions blank if doing so allows you to
answer everything else correctly. Sometimes, there’s no way to make certain questions (e.g.,
passage/ graphic, support/ undermine) go quickly. If they take too much time and you’re not
fixated on getting a perfect score, you can probably afford to skip a couple of them.

39

--- PAGE 39 ---
SAT Reading is not a guessing game.

This is just as true as it was before the quarter-point wrong-answer penalty was abolished.
Yes, you might be able to jack up your score a bit by guessing strategically on a relatively
small number of questions, but there is still no substitute for carefully thinking your way
through each question. The chance of your reaching your score goal simply by being a lucky
guesser on more than a few questions is very small indeed.

If you consistently get down to two choices and always pick the wrong one, that’s a sign that
you either don’t really know how to answer the questions or that you’re not reading carefully
enough. I've had a lot of students tell me they always got down to two and then guessed
wrong when in fact they were missing the entire point of the passage. That's not a test-taking
problem; that’s a comprehension problem.

If you are just not reading carefully enough, slow down, put your finger on the page, make
sure you're getting every single word, and make a concerted effort to think things through
before you pick an answer.

On the other hand, if you really aren’t sure how to choose between answers, you need to
figure out what particular skills you're missing and work on them. If you're
misunderstanding the passage and/or answer choices because you don’t know vocabulary,
you need to keep a running list of unfamiliar words. Anything you see once is something
you're likely to encounter again.

If you’re getting thrown by complicated syntax, you need to spend more time reading SAT-
level material. If you can’t figure out what the author thinks, you need to focus on key
phrases and places (e.g., last sentence of the first paragraph, end of the conclusion).

You also need to spend some time getting familiar with the kinds of answers that are usually
correct and incorrect. If you know, for example, that options with extreme language such as
always, never, or niost important tend to be wrong, you'll be a lot less tempted to pick them ~
even if you think you might be able to argue for an interpretation that makes them work.
Remember: just because an answer is there doesn’t mean it deserves serious consideration.
If you look for reasons to keep answers, you'll never get down to one,

But on the other hand...
Don’t assume you'll always recognize the right answer when you See it.

Incorrect answers are written to sound plausible. You might get away with jumping to the
answers on easy and medium questions, but you'll almost certainly fall down on at least
some of the hard ones unless you do some legwork upfront. The test is designed that way.
The fact that there are answer choices already there does not excuse you from having to think.

Moreover, confusing does not equal wrong. If there’s any chance an answer could work, you
have to leave it until you see something better. Sometimes the right answer just won't say
what you're expecting it to say; in those cases, you need to keep an open enough mind to
consider that you've been thinking in the wrong direction and be willing to go back and
revise your original assumption.

40

--- PAGE 40 ---
&
&
?
3
Fi
&
€
a

Seog RWA Hig ggdocad ALORA rhein OREN

MANE ENS Ne AGS at

eMC ainar

tet AR OO ARI LAE he AS A BINA NIN AIBA Ee 9 20a y

There are no trick questions.

Reading questions may require you to apply very careful reasoning or make fine distinctions
between ideas — but they’re also set up so that you can figure them out. If you think your way
carefully through a question and put the answer in your own words, then see an option
choice that truly says the same thing, it’s almost certainly correct.

Go back to the passage and read.

Even if you think you’re certain of what the passage says in the lines cited, you probably need
to go back and read it anyway (unless you can reason out the answer based on the main
point). Stress makes memory unreliable, so don’t assume you can trust yours. You could be
absolutely certain that you remember the author mentioning a particular idea in line 15 when
in fact it doesn’t show up until five or ten lines later and refers to something that someone else
thinks. Don’t play games or be cocky. Just take the extra few seconds and check.

Don’t ever read just half a sentence.

Context counts. If you read only the first or last half of a sentence, you might miss the fact
that the author thinks exactly the opposite of what that half of the sentence says. You might
also overlook the exact information you need to answer a question.

If the answer isn’t in the lines you’re given, it must be somewhere else.

If you read the line(s) referenced in the question and can’t figure out the answer, chances are
the information you need is located either before or after. Don’t just assume you're missing
something and read the same set of lines over and over again or, worse, guess. Again: be
willing to revise your original assumption and start over. Yes, this will take time (although
probably not as much as you think), but you're a lot more likely to get the question right.

When in doubt, reread the end of the conclusion.

The point of the passage is more likely to be located at the end of the conclusion, usually the
last sentence or two, than it is just about anywhere else. If you get lost and start to panic, stop
and reread it to focus yourself. It won’t work all the time, but it will work often enough.

Writing things down is not a sign of weakness.

Most people don’t have a huge problem writing down their work for math problems; the
same, alas, cannot be said for reading. Unfortunately, one of the biggest differences between
people scoring pretty well vs. exceptionally well is often their degree of willingness to write
down each step of a problem. The very highest scorers tend to view writing each step down
as a crucial part of the process necessary to get the right answer, whereas lower scorers often
view writing as a drag on their time or a sign of weakness that they should be above. It’s not
either of those things. You can jot things down quickly, and the only person who has to read
your handwriting is you. Writing also keeps you focused and takes pressure off of your
working memory. If you're really certain what you're looking for, you probably don’t need to
spend the time. If you have any hesitation, though, it’s worth your while. When you're under
a lot of pressure, having even one less thing to worry about is a big deal. Besides, you
probably wouldn't try to figure the hardest math problems out in your head, so why on earth
would you work that way for reading?

41

--- PAGE 41 ---
The order in which you read the passage and do the questions doesn’t really matter.

What truly matters is that you have the necessary close reading and reasoning skills to figure
out or recognize the correct answers. Strategy is not a substitute for skill. Rather, it’s a way
of leveraging the skills you do have to work efficiently and with the least possible amount of
second-guessing.

Don’t fight the test.

It doesn’t matter how much you want the answer to be C) instead of B). It never will be, and
unless you want to file a complaint with the College Board, you're stuck. Instead of arguing
about why your answer should have been right, try to understand why it was wrong.
Chances are you misunderstood something or extrapolated a bit too far along the way. If
you're serious about improving, your job is to adapt yourself to the mindset of the test
because it certainly won't adapt itself to yours. Who knows, you might even learn something.

42

--- PAGE 42 ---
4
é
%
:
3
S
%
is
j
‘
y
%
&
{
&
i

senisttbataiaatl aca be ONIN tes otic

:
z
i
‘
%
&
;
4
Ea
¢
}
:
g
&
i
t
é
#

OSA EE ALIEN re 9 NORE SBE GAS 0 SOROS EES SAREE RIOT MORAN DE IO OS ALT hf cr gu EDRY EC A NES

Sita odl 5 Ne hag

Vocabulary in Context

We're going to start by looking at vocabulary-in-context questions, which are among the most
common types of questions to appear: there are usually eight or so per test (about 15% of the
total), sometimes placed back-to-back. Compared to other types of Reading questions,
vocabulary-in-context questions tend to be more straightforward and less dependent on the
passage as a whole. That said, they can also be surprisingly subtle and tricky at times.

The prefix CON- means “with,” so context literally means “with the text.” Vocabulary-in-
context questions thus require you to use clues in the text itself to determine the meanings of
specific words and phrases. These questions come in two varieties: the vast majority test
second definitions of common words (e.g., poor, nature, clear), but occasionally you may also
be asked to identify the meanings of short phrases (e.g., in its wake),

The principle on which these questions are based can be summarized as follows:
Context determines meaning.

On the SAT, words can be used to mean whatever an author happens to want them to mean,
regardless of their dictionary definitions. As long as you are able to 1) use information from
the surrounding sentence(s) to determine the intended meaning of a word; and 2) match one
of the choices to that meaning, you can find your way to the answer.

Sometimes, the word tested will be used in a way that’s fairly similar to its most common
meaning - but then again, sometimes it won't. With only a few exceptions, however, the
words you are asked about will not be used in their most literal definition (e.g., spill to mean
“knock over”), If they did, there would be no reason to test them in the first place! So as a
general rule, if you see the usual definition of a word among the answer choices, you should
assume that it is incorrect and only reconsider it if no other option fits.

It also means that when you see a question that says, In line 14, “fine” most nearly means..., you
can think of the question as saying, In line 14, most nearly means. The fact that fine
rather than some other word happens to be used in the passage is irrelevant.

In some cases, a familiarity with common second meanings may be helpful. For example,
want is often used to mean “lack,” especially in old-fashioned writing. In other cases, though,
words will be used in ways unlikely to appear on any vocabulary list. A common alternate
meaning may even appear as an incorrect answer. So while you may find the list of second
meanings on p. 51 helpful, you should be aware that it does not cover the full range of
potential definitions.

43

--- PAGE 43 ---
Strategies:

4) Plug in your own word and find the answer choice that matches.

If you are able to use this strategy effectively, it is often the simplest and fastest way to
answer vocabulary questions, The only potential difficulty is that sometimes, even if you
provide a perfectly adequate synonym for the word in question, the correct answer will be a
word that you find odd, or that you do not recognize as having the same meaning as the term
you supplied. If you are a strong reader with a solid vocabulary, however, these issues should
not normally pose a serious problem.

2) Plug each answer choice into the sentence.

Frequently, you'll be able to hear that a particular choice does not sound correct or have the
right meaning within the context of a sentence. The only potential downside is that
sometimes, as is true for #1, the correct word is not a word you would think to use. As a
result, you might talk yourself out of choosing that answer because you think it sounds odd.

3) Play positive/negative, then plug in.

If you can determine from context whether the word is positive or negative, you can often
eliminate at least one answer. You can then plug the remaining answers back into the
sentence and see which one makes the most sense in context. In rare instances, you may even
be able to use this technique to eliminate three answers, leaving you only one possibility.

Additional Points:

While some people feel most comfortable using a single approach for all vocabulary-in-
context questions, it is also true that certain questions lend themselves better to certain
approaches. On some straightforward questions you may find it easiest to plug in your own
word, while on other, less clear-cut questions, a combination of positive/negative and
process of elimination might provide the most effective strategy.

Second, you should pay particular attention to clues indicating that a word in question has a
similar or opposite meaning to another word. For example, in the phrase quiet and reserved,
the word and tells you that reserved must mean something similar to quiet; and in the phrase
delicate but sound, the word but tells you that sound must mean roughly the opposite of delicate.
On the other hand, if you cannot determine the meaning of a word from the sentence in
which it appears, you must establish a slightly larger context. Read from the sentence above
to the sentence below - one of those sentences will very likely include the information you
need to answer the question.

Finally, don’t get distracted by unfamiliar words in the answer choices. It doesn’t matter
whether you know the definition of the wrong answers as long as you can identify the
right answer. The College Board is fond of using distractors whose definitions students are
unlikely to know, while making correct answers relatively simple. As a result, you should
never choose an answer like egregious just because it looks sophisticated. If anything, it’s more
likely to be wrong. As a rule, always work from what you do know to what you don’t know.
If you’re not sure about a word, ignore it and deal with everything you know for sure first.

Starting on the next page, we're going to look at some examples.

44

--- PAGE 44 ---
Example #1

When Saburo joined the track and field team at
Bukkyo High School, the sport was enjoying a
popularity it had not known before the war. At the time,
few schools could afford baseball bats or gymnastic i A

. Lee ) forced.
5 equipment. And there was something in the simplicity
of the sport — the straight path to the goal, the dramatic |
finish line — that stirred the community to yells and C) inspired.
often tears. On Sundays entire families came outdoors D) disturbed.
to cheer, Thermoses of cold wheat tea slung across their
10 chests. They sat on woven mats and munched on rice
balls, roasted potatoes, hard-boiled eggs, and pickled
shoots of fuki gathered up in the hills.

As used in line 7, “stirred” most nearly means

B) transformed.

This is an excellent example of a question that lends itself well to playing positive/ negative.
The passage is clearly positive - track and field is enjoying a new popularity, and families came
outside to cheer - so you can assume that the correct answer will be positive as well. Don’t get
thrown off by the reference to yells and tears.

Forced and disturbed are both negative, so A) and D) can be eliminated immediately.
Transformed is positive, but it does not make any sense when it is plugged back into the
sentence. B) can thus be eliminated as well. That leaves inspired, which logically refers to
something that would cause great emotion.

Example #2

Every time a car drives through a major intersection,
As used in line 3, “registering” most nearly means

it becomes a data point, Magnetic coils of wire lie just
beneath the pavement, registering each passing car. This
starts a cascade of information: Computers tally the
5 number and speed of cars, shoot the data through
underground cables to a command center and finally
translate it into the colors red, yellow and green. On the
f seventh floor of Boston City Hall, the three colors
splash like paint across a wall-sized map.

;
;
Fa
i
H
i
:
z
5
§

A) preparing.
B) recording.
C) inscribing.
D) transmitting.

VEEP GEO tae art

The passage is talking about magnetic coils of wire that notify computers of the cars’ presence,
beginning a cascade of information. Logically, the coils of wire must be recording each car.

A 4shneS Aare ger ONeNNA npg oh

Otherwise, you can play process of elimination. Preparing doesn’t fit, so A) can be crossed out.
} If you don’t know what inscribing (engraving) means, ignore C) for the moment and deal with
i the words you do know first.

Now, be very careful with D): the passage implies that the coils of wire transmit information
about the cars to computers, but it is illogical to say that coils of wire transmit each passing car.

ae ithe RE MND REDE

If you're stuck between B) and C), don’t fall into the trap of assuming that the harder-looking
word must be right. Instead, plug B) into the sentence: Magnetic coils of wire lie just beneath the
pavement, recording each passing car. Yes, that makes sense. So the answer is B).

pve ORE CIaNO Mndaan ids” EGET Giy

vA BON DAR ATA wD AEM ARI OY END

45

--- PAGE 45 ---
Example #3

Until the past few years, physicists agreed that the : es pole
As used in line 5, “closing in on” most nearly means

entire universe is generated from a few mathematical
truths and principles of symmetry, perhaps throwing in
a handful of parameters like the mass of an electron.

5 It seemed that we were closing in on a vision of our
universe in which everything could be calculated,
predicted, and understood, However, two theories,
eternal inflation and string theory, now suggest that the
same fundamental principles from which the laws of

10 nature derive may lead to many different self-consistent
universes, with many different properties.

A) experimenting.
B) approaching.

C) hypothesizing.
D) shutting down.

The beginning of the passage discusses the fact that physicists believed they were beginning
to understand how to describe the universe mathematically. Given that context, closing in on
must mean something like “getting close to.” That is the definition of approaching, so B) is
correct.

Playing process of elimination, A) can be eliminated because it does not make sense to say It
seemed that we were experimenting a vision of our universe... Scientists could conduct
experiments to gain a greater understanding of the universe, but it is not grammatically or
logically possible to “experiment” a vision.

Be careful with C). It is true that a synonym for this word, predicted, does appear in the
passage, but that meaning does not make sense in this context. The two sentences make it
clear that physicists believed they were on the verge of possessing a thorough understanding
of how the universe works. They were not predicting a vision of [the] universe in which
everything could be calculated, etc. - that vision was already firmly in place.

To eliminate D), you can play positive/negative. The fact that scientists agreed that a major
problem in physics was about to be solved tells you that all of the information before the
word However in line 7 has a positive focus. As a result, you can assume that the correct

answer will be positive as well. Shutting down is negative and thus can be eliminated.

That again leaves us with B) as the only possibility.

46

--- PAGE 46 ---
seep NENA Ce eka eqn ete

we IRA aS eS reg rN EMERSON

ie Sesame setae

3
i
4

SON PRE A QE

eSNG EIR EY

{

NRC SOMMER CALE ANIONS 8h Rig BOY MEA

10

15

20

25

30

35

Now let’s look at an example of a historical document. It’s from an 1872 speech called “Self-
Made Men,” written and delivered by Frederick Douglass. The language here is somewhat
more challenging, so we're going to spend more time breaking things down.

The various conditions of men and the different uses
they make of their powers and opportunities in life, are
full of puzzling contrasts and contradictions. Here, as
elsewhere, it is easy to dogmatize, but it is not so easy
to define, explain and demonstrate. The natural laws for
the government, well-being and progress of mankind,
seem to be equal and are equal; but the subjects of these
laws everywhere abound in inequalities, discords and
contrasts. We cannot have fruit without flowers, but we
often have flowers without fruit. The promise of youth
often breaks down in manhood, and real excellence
often comes from unexpected quarters.

The scene presented from this view is as a thousand
arrows shot from the same point and aimed at the same
object. United in aim, they are divided in flight. Some
fly too high, others too low. Some go to the right,
others to the left. Some fly too far and others, not far
enough, and only a few hit the mark. Such is life.
United in the quiver, they are divided in the air,
Matched when dormant, they are unmatched in action.

When we attempt to account for greatness we never
get nearer to the truth than did the greatest of poets and
philosophers when he classified the conditions of
greatness: “Some are born great, some achieve
greatness and some have greatness thrust upon them...’

Men of very ordinary faculties have, nevertheless,
made a very respectable way in the world and have

7

sometimes presented even brilliant examples of success.

On the other hand, what is called genius is often found
by the wayside, a miserable wreck; the more deplorable
and shocking because of the height from which it

has fallen and the loss and ruin involved in the falf.
There is, perhaps, a compensation in disappointment
and in the contradiction of means to ends and promise
to performance. These imply a constant effort on the
part of nature to hold the balance between all her
children and to bring success within the reach of the
humblest as wel! as of the most exalted.

Question #1:

ror errerertenncrrrnntraryacentetinoaeitn nen aiesnamasseartreOue teney anita natant sineninrnl4Metstebrite pigs snepmnaeraren eteareeinenieesnansitttytete aati me amarammurnstnrentsaurtd HA fiat stbSsthamrrenerembnshAi eet ee epstenasnceremepamen eet sustensniedtihtet eanahmnrereseeteststereesesee

As used in line 12, “quarters” most nearly means

A) divisions.
B) relations.
C) origins.

D) particles,

As used in line 20, “matched” most nearly means

A) parailel.

B) equal.

C) calm.

D) indistinguishable.

Let's start by considering the context. Essentially, Douglass is discussing the fact that some
people are more successful in life than others (The natural laws...seem to be equal, but the subjects
of these laws everywhere abound in inequality). He also mentions that some individuals start out
with great promise but then fail to live up to their potential (The promise of youth often breaks
down in manhood). The word and joins that idea to the second half of the sentence, where
quarters appears, implying that the second half of the sentence must express a similar idea.

--- PAGE 47 ---
Logically, the second half of the sentence must indicate that “real excellence” comes from
people who weren't originally expected to be excellent. In other words, this type of excellence
often comes from unexpected origins. The answer is therefore C).

Alternately, you can try plugging each answer into the sentence.

A) ...the promise of youth often breaks down in manhood, and real excellence often comes
from unexpected divisions.

That doesn’t really make sense - excellence would be very unlikely to result from divisions.
Even if you find the antiquated language difficult to decipher, that fact hasn’t changed since
the nineteenth century. So A) can be eliminated.

B) ...the promise of youth often breaks down in manhood, and real excellence often comes
from unexpected relations.

Be careful with this answer. Yes, perhaps excellence can be the result of relations, but that
meaning doesn’t fit this particular context. The focus is on individuals who start out with a lot
and achieve little vs. individuals who start out with little and achieve a lot.

C) ...the promise of youth often breaks down in manhood, and real excellence often comes
from unexpected origins.

Yes, this fits with Douglass’s discussion of people who achieve disproportionately to where
they start out. Even if you don’t understand every word of the passage, keeping that idea in
mind can give you just enough information to get to the answer.

D) ...the promise of youth often breaks down in manhood, and real excellence often comes
from unexpected particles.

No, this makes no sense whatsoever. So the answer is C).
Question #2:

This is a good example of a question in which it is helpful to keep the bigger picture in mind.
If you can do so and avoid getting caught up in the particulars of Douglass’s discussion about
arrows, this question is a good deal more straightforward than the previous one.

What is the major focus on the passage? Inequality. More specifically, how people can start
out from roughly the same conditions and yet end up in wildly different places. Given that
context, eqital is the most logical option. Parallel is too literal (the passage has nothing to do
with math), and calm is off-topic, but be careful with indistinguishable. This word is too
extreme; Douglass isn’t referring to people who can’t be told apart from one another, but
rather ones who start out from roughly the same place in life.

The answer is therefore B).

48

--- PAGE 48 ---
10

15

20

25

30

35

Now try some additional questions on your own. Your goal in this exercise is to work
through each question as far as you can before looking at the answers, so try to resist the

temptation to jump ahead!

The various conditions of men and the different uses
they make of their powers and opportunities in life, are
full of puzzling contrasts and contradictions. Here, as
elsewhere, it is easy to dogmatize, but it is not so easy
to define, explain and demonstrate. The natural laws for
the government, well-being and progress of mankind,
seem to be equal and are equal; but the subjects of these
laws everywhere abound in inequalities, discords and
contrasts. We cannot have fruit without flowers, but we
often have flowers without fruit. The promise of youth
often breaks down in manhood, and real excellence
often comes from unexpected quarters.

The scene presented from this view is as a thousand
arrows shot from the same point and aimed at the same
object. United in aim, they are divided in flight. Some
fly too high, others too low. Some go to the right,
others to the left. Some fly too far and others, not far
enough, and only a few hit the mark. Such is life.
United in the quiver, they are divided in the air.
Matched when dormant, they are unmatched in action.

When we attempt to account for greatness we never
get nearer to the truth than did the greatest of poets and
philosophers when he classified the conditions of
greatness: “Some are born great, some achieve
greatness and some have greatness thrust upon them...’

Men of very ordinary faculties have, nevertheless,
made a very respectable way in the world and have

>

sometimes presented even brilliant examples of success.

On the other hand, what is called genius is often found
by the wayside, a miserable wreck; the more deplorable
and shocking because of the height from which it

has fallen and the loss and ruin involved in the fall.
There is, perhaps, a compensation in disappointment
and in the contradiction of means to ends and promise
to performance. These imply a constant effort on the
part of nature to hold the balance between all her
children and to bring success within the reach of the
humblest as well as of the most exalted.

f
f
}
+
}
}
i
H
j
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i

|

As used in tine 26, “ordinary” most nearly means

1) Underline context clues

2) Your word OR positive/ negative:

A) accepted.

B) customary.
C) unremarkable.
D) habitual.

As used in line 36, “hold” most nearly means

1) Underline context clues

2) Your word OR positive/negative:

A) grasp.

B) maintain.
C) purchase.
D) dominate.

Answers and explanations are at the end of this chapter (p. 61).

49

--- PAGE 49 ---
Second Meanings and Answer Choices

Vocabulary can also be tested in very indirect ways, even in questions that appear to test
something else entirely, Whenever possible, you should pay close attention to answer choices
that contain second meanings. If you have difficulty recognizing when words are being used
in alternate meanings, or if having to think about answer choices this way seems too
complicated given all the other things you have to worry about, this is probably not a good.
strategy for you. But if you are an exceptionally strong reader and want to have some fun
with the test, this is a “game” you might play.

To be clear: you should never choose an answer only because it contains a second meaning.
You can, however, give such answers special consideration and/or check them first.

Yogi Berra, the former Major League baseball
catcher and coach, once remarked that you can’t hit
and think at the same time. Of course, since he also
reportedly said, “I really didn’t say everything I said,”
it is not clear we should take his statements at face
value. Nonetheless, a widespread view — in both
academic journals and the popular press — is that
thinking about what you are doing, as you are doing it,
interferes with performance. The idea is that once you
have developed the ability to play an arpeggio on the
piano, putt a golf ball or parallel park, attention to what
you are doing leads to inaccuracies, blunders and
sometimes even utter paralysis. As the great
choreographer George Balanchine would say to his
dancers, “Don’t think, dear; just do.”

Perhaps you have experienced this destructive force
yourself. Start thinking about just how to carry a full
glass of water without spilling, and you’!l end up
drenched. How, exactly, do you initiate a telephone
conversation? Begin wondering, and before long, the
recipient of your call will notice the heavy breathing
and hang up. Our actions, the French philosopher
Maurice Merleau-Ponty tells us, exhibit a “magical”
efficacy, but when we focus on them, they degenerate
into the absurd. A 13-time winner on the Professional
Golfers Association Tour, Dave Hill, put it like this:
“You can’t be thinking about the mechanics of the sport
while you are performing.”

The passage indicates that focusing on one’s
actions as they are performed

A) is an important component of improving a skill.
B) is more common among experts than it is
among other people.

C) can result in a compromised performance.
D) leads to a superior level of performance.

This is a fairly straightforward question, but we're only interested in one word in one answer.
Choice C) contains the word compromised. Now, contpromised usually means “came to an
agreement,” but here it’s being used in its second meaning: “put at risk.” That single word
suggests that C) deserves close attention. And in fact, C) is the correct answer.

The view discussed in the first paragraph can be summarized as “paying attention to an
action while you do it makes you worse at it.” But if you interpret compromise as meaning
“come to an agreement,” C) won’t make sense. And that’s precisely why the answer is written
that way.

50

--- PAGE 50 ---
z
$
y
j
Hi
A
y

ans

Common Second Meanings

Affect (v.) - to take on, assume; affected (adj.) - behaving in an artificial/ pretentious way
Afford - to grant (e.g., to afford an opportunity)

Allow ~ to enable, permit

Appreciate - to take into account, recognize the merits of, OR to increase in value
Appropriate (app-row-pree-ATE) - to take from, steal

Arrest - to stop (not just put handcuffs on a criminal)

Assume - to take on responsibility for, acquire (e.g., to assume a new position)
Basic - fundamental, essential

Bent - liking or preference for

Capacity - ability

Chance (v.) - to attempt

Check ~- to control (e.g., the vaccine checked the spread of the disease)

Clear - obvious, evident

Common ~ widespread

Compromise (v.) - to endanger or make vulnerable (e.g., to compromise one’s beliefs)
Constitution - build (e.g., a football player has a solid constitution)

Conviction - strong belief. Noun form of convinced.

Currency - acceptance, approval (of an idea)

Demonstrate ~ to establish (e.g., to demonstrate the validity of a hypothesis)
Economy ~ thrift (e.g., a writer who has an economical style is one who uses few words)
Element - component, aspect

Elevated ~ lofty, high-minded, idealistic

Establish - to prove, validate (e.g., to establish the accuracy of a theory)

Execute - to carry out (e.g., to execute an order)

Exercise - to put into use, carry out a function

Exploit - to make use of, take advantage of (does not carry a negative connotation)
Facility - the ability to do something easily (e.g., a facility for learning languages)
Faculty - ability or aptitude

Fancy (v.) - to take a liking to

Fine - (1) narrow, thin (e.g., fine lines); (2) delicate, elegant; (3) keen, highly attuned
Foil - to put a stop to (e.g., to foil a robbery)

Fundamental ~ basic, essential

51

--- PAGE 51 ---
Grave/ Gravity - serious(ness)

Kicks - amusement (e.g., just for kicks)

Nature ~ character, personality

Observe - to follow (e.g., to observe a law)

Plastic/ plasticity - able to be changed or shaped (e.g,., brain plasticity)
Poor - inferior, substandard, ill

Provoke - to elicit (e.g., to provoke a reaction)

Qualify ~ to provide more information or detail about

Range — scope

Raw ~ unrefined, unfiltered

Realize — to achieve {a goal)

Reconcile ~ to bring together opposing or contradictory ideas
Relate/ Relay - to pass on information, give an account of (a story)
Reservations - doubts, misgivings

Reserve ~ to hold off on (e.g., to reserve judgment)

Scale - level (e.g., the experiment was repeated on a larger scale)
Scrap (v.) - to eliminate

Sheer - utter, complete

Sound - firm, stable, reliable, valid (e.g., a sound argument)
Spare, Severe ~ plain, unadorned

Static - unchanging

Store (n.) ~ reserve, stock (e.g., to keep a store of food for emergencies)
Strength - significance

Sustain (v.) - to withstand

Temper - to moderate, make less harsh

Train ~ to fixate on (e.g., to train one’s eyes on something)

Treat - to alter

Uniform (adj.) - constant, unvarying

Unqualified ~ absolute

Upset (v.) - to interfere with an expected outcome

Urge - to argue in favor of, advocate

Want (n.) - lack

Weight - seriousness, importance

Yield ~ to reveal (e.g., an experiment yields results)

52

--- PAGE 52 ---
SANBORN feat saben rica ghd

san ginds aTaGODA Atak IRE

aerate R SAN Nae

bene

nigra cgi see rntooet

ceIS YANN acamC OTT,

Additional Words to Know

Arbitrary - done or decided randomly, without clear reason
Bolster - to provide support for (an argument)
Comprehensive - thorough, complete

Condone - to disregard or pardon an illegal or objectionable act
Deter - to discourage

Disparity ~ difference, gap

Diverge - to separate from

Doctrine ~ principle or set of teachings

Empirical - derived from experiment or observation
Endeavor - attempt

Esteem (v.) - to hold in high regard

Feasible - doable

Grievance ~ a wrong, grounds for complaint
Hypothesis - educated guess

Idealistic ~ cherishing noble or high-minded principles
Indifferent - not caring, utterly detached

Inevitable - unavoidable

Innate ~ inborn

Innovation - new invention or discovery

Legislation - laws

Lofty - high-minded, exalted

Moral - concerned with the rules of right and wrong
Paradox ~ apparent contradiction

Partisan - strong adherent to a party or idea
Phenomenon - occurrence

Pragmatic, Prudent - practical

Scrutinize - to examine closely

Skeptical - questioning, doubtful

Stagnation - failure to progress or grow

Stipulate - to specify a requirement

Subordinate ~ lower-ranking

Substantiate - to prove; unsubstantiated - unproven
Synthesize ~ to bring together, integrate

Undermine ~ to weaken, attack indirectly

Underscore - to emphasize

53

--- PAGE 53 ---
1.

2.

Vocabulary in Context Exercises

Math poses difficulties. There’s little room for
eyewitness testimony, seasoned judgment, a skeptical
eye or transcendental rhetoric.

Around the middle of the 20th century, science
dispensed with the fantasy that we could easily colonize
the other planets in our solar system. Science fiction
writers absorbed the new reality: soon, moon and

5 asteroid settings replaced Mars and Venus.

Conservationists have historically been at odds
with the people who inhabit wildernesses. During the
last half of the 20th century, millions of indigenous
people were ousted from their homelands to establish
nature sanctuaries free of humans. Most succumbed to
malnutrition, disease and exploitation. Such outcomes —
coupled with the realization that indigenous groups
usually help to stabilize ecosystems by, for instance,
keeping fire at bay—have convinced major conservation

10 groups to take local human concerns into account. The

World Wildlife Fund (WWF) now describes indigenous
peoples as “natural allies,” and the Nature Conservancy
pledges to seek their “free, informed and prior” consent
to projects impacting their territories.

54

As used in line 2, “seasoned” “most nearly means

A) determined.
B) tasteful.
C) experienced.
D) objective.

As used in line 2 “dispensed with” most nearly
means

A) distributed.
B) disposed of.
C) identified with.
D) renewed.

As used in line 5, “free” most nearly means

A) liberated.

B) uncompensated.
C) devoid,

D) whole.

As used in line 7, “coupled” most nearly means

A) cooperated.
B) associated.
C) related.

D) combined.

As used in line 10, “account” most nearly means

A) contact.

B) consideration.
€) favor.

D) prominence.

--- PAGE 54 ---
As used in line 11, “championed” most nearly means

4, Perhaps the most classic definition of a species is a
group of organisms that can breed with each other to
produce fertile offspring, an idea originally set forth in
1942 by evolutionary biologist Ernst Mayr. While

5 elegant in its simplicity, this concept has since come
under fire by biologists, who argue that it didn’t apply to
many organisms, such as single-celled ones that
reproduce asexually, or those that have been shown to
breed with other distinct organisms to create hybrids.

10 ~— Alternatives quickly arose. Some biologists
championed an ecological definition that assigned
species according to the environmental niches they fill
(this animal recycles soil nutrients, this predator keeps
insects in check). Others asserted that a species was a

15 set of organisms with physical characteristics that were
distinct from others (the peacock’s fanned tail, the beaks
of Darwin’s finches).

The discovery of DNA’s double helix prompted the
creation of yet another definition, one in which scientists

20 could look for minute genetic differences and draw even
finer Jines denoting species. Based on a 1980 book by
biologists Niles Eldredge and Joel Cracraft, under the
definition of a phylogenetic species, animal species now

A) advocated.
B) denied.

C) counseled.
D) disrupted.

As used in line 18, “prompted” most nearly means

A) rejected.
B) elaborated.
C) spurred.
D) defended.

As used in line 21, “finer” most nearly means

peat

Ss TaNIY MAS RRM TO DAR AN

A) narrower.

25 Floridian orchards, there are now trees that, thanks to
innovative technology, can fight the greening tide.

touch of a jumpy brown bug on a sun-kissed leaf,
From there, the bacterial disease incubates in the
5 tree’s roots, then moves back up the trunk in full force,

causing nutrient flows to seize up. Leaves turn yellow, i P|
and the oranges, deprived of sugars from the leaves,
remain green, sour, and hard. Many fall before harvest,
brown necrotic flesh ringing failed stems.

10 ‘For the past decade, Florida's oranges have been
literally starving..Since it first appeared in 2005,
citrus greening, also known by its Chinese name,
huanglongbing, has swept across Florida’s groves
like a flood. With no hills to block it, the Asian citrus

15 psyllid—the invasive aphid relative that carries the
disease—has infected nearly every orchard in the
state. By one estimate, 80 percent of Florida’s citrus
trees are infected and declining,

f The disease has spread beyond Florida to nearly

20 every orange-growing region in the United States.
Despite many generations of breeding by humanity,

; no citrus plant resists greening; it afflicts lemons, i C) particular.

D) conventional.

can differ by just 2 percent of their DNA to be B) keener.
: 25 considered separate. | C) milder
i i D) daintier.
i 5. Citrus greening, the plague that could wipe out grapefruits, and other citrus species as well. Once a

{
!

Florida's $9 billion orange industry, begins with the i tree is infected, it will die. Yet in a few select
|

ej, dbearaneameaeaeinc

As it is used in line 9, “ringing” most nearly means

A) nourishing,

ES ENA YANN IRMA EAI

B) implanting.
C) growing.
D) surrounding.

As it is used in line 24, “select” most nearly means

A) exclusive.
B) preferred.

55

ESE EO eR be re p00

--- PAGE 55 ---
6.

10

10

15

20

25

Chimps do it, birds do it, even you and I do it.
Once you see someone yawn, you are compelled to
do the same. Now it seems that wolves can be added
to the list of animals known to spread yawns like a
contagion,

Among humans, even thinking about yawning can
trigger the reflex, leading some to suspect that catching
a yawn is linked to our ability to empathize with other
humans. For instance, contagious yawning activates the
same parts of the brain that govern empathy and social
know-how. And some studies have shown that humans
with more fine-tuned social skills are more likely to
catch a yawn.

The following passage is adapted from Daniel Webster's
speech to the Senate in support of the Compromise of
1850, the congressional effort to resolve the issues
propelling the United States toward a civil war.

I wish to speak to-day, not as a Massachusetts
man, nor as a Northern man, but as an American, and
a member of the Senate of the United States. It is
fortunate that there is a Senate of the United States; a
body not yet moved from its propriety, not lost to a just

sense of its own dignity and its own high responsibilities,

and a body to which the country looks, with confidence,
for wise, moderate, patriotic, and healing counsels.

It is not to be denied that we live in the midst of strong
agitations, and are surrounded by very considerable
dangers to our institutions and government. The
imprisoned winds are let Joose. The East, the North,
and the stormy South combine to throw the whole sea
into commotion, to toss its billows to the skies, and
disclose its profoundest depths. I do not affect to regard
myself, Mr, President, as holding, or as fit to hold, the
helm in this combat with the political elements; but ]
have a duty to perform, and I mean to perform it with
fidelity, not without a sense of existing dangers, but not
without hope. I have a part to act, not for my own
security or safety, for fam looking out for no fragment
upon which to float away from the wreck, if wreck there
must be, but for the good of the whole, and the
preservation of all; and there is that which will keep me
to my duty during this struggle, whether the sun and the
stars shall appear, or shall not appear for many days.

I speak to-day for the preservation of the Union.

56

As used in line 10, “govern” most nearly means

A)
B)
C)
D)

elect.

control.
charge.
require,

As used in line 16, “fit? most nearly means

A)
B)
C)
D)

coordinated.
adjusted,
healthy.
suited,

As used in line 20, “part” most nearly means

A)
B)
C)
D)

aspect,
role.
section.
sliver.

--- PAGE 56 ---
i

iP ORATOR NOOR Agi

atch Mag aNd

PAREN 0s
age

sneaieye

wm

10

I5

20

25

30

35

40

45

To understand what the new software—that is,
analytics—can do that’s different from more familiar
software like spreadsheets, word processing, and
graphics, consider the lowly photograph. Here the
relevant facts aren’t how many bytes constitute a digital
photograph, or a billion of them, That’s about as
instructive as counting the silver halide molecules used
to form a single old-fashioned print photo. The important
feature of a digital image’s bytes is that, unlike
crystalline molecules, they are uniquely easy to store,
transport, and manipulate with software. In the first era
of digital images, people were fascinated by the
convenience and malleability (think PhotoShop) of
capturing, storing, and sharing pictures. Now, instead of
using software to manage photos, we can mine features
of the bytes that make up the digital image. Facebook
can, without privacy invasion, track where and when,
for example, vacationing is trending, since digital images
reveal at least that much. But more importantly, those
data can be cross-correlated, even in real time, with
seemingly unrelated data such as local weather, interest
rates, crime figures, and so on. Such correlations
associated with just one photograph aren’t revealing.
But imagine looking at billions of photos over weeks,
months, years, then correlating them with dozens of
directly related data sets (vacation bookings, air traffic),
tangential information (weather, interest rates,
unemployment), or orthogonal information (social or
political trends). With essentially free super-computing,
we can mine and usefully associate massive, formerly
unrelated data sets and unveil all manner of economic,
cultural, and social realities.

For science fiction aficionados, Isaac Asimov
anticipated the idea of using massive data sets to predict
human behavior, coining it “psychohistory” in his 1951
Foundation trilogy. The bigger the data set, Asimov said
then, the more predictable the future. With big-data
analytics, one can finally see the forest, instead of just
the capillaries in the tree leaves. Or to put it in more
accurate terms, one can see beyond the apparently
random motion of a few thousand molecules of air inside
a balloon; one can see the balloon itself, and beyond that,
that it is inflating, that it is yellow, and that it is part of a
bunch of balloons en route to a birthday party, The
data/software world has, until now, been largely about
looking at the molecules inside one balloon.

57

As in line {5, “mine” most nearly means

A) exploit.
B) contain.
C) respond.
D) describe.

As used in line 31, “unveil” most nearly means

A) reveal.
B) analyze.
C) alter.

D) uphold.

As used in line 34, “anticipated” most nearly means

A) expected.
B) accumulated.
C) foresaw.
D) explained.

--- PAGE 57 ---
10

415

20

25

30

35

This passage is adapted from Sharon Tregaskis, “What
Bees Tell Us About Global Climate Change,” © 2010
by Johns Hopkins Magazine.

Standing in the apiary on the grounds of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture’s Bee Research Laboratory
in Beltsville, Maryland, Wayne Esaias digs through the
canvas shoulder bag leaning against his leg in search of
the cable he uses to download data. It’s dusk as he runs
the cord from his laptop— precariously perched on the
beam of a cast-iron platform scale—to a small, battery-
operated data logger attached to the spring inside the
scale’s steel column. In the 1800s, a scale like this
would have weighed sacks of grain or crates of apples,
peaches, and melons. Since arriving at the USDA’s bee
lab in January 2007, this scale has been loaded with a
single item: a colony of Apis mellifera, the fuzzy,
black-and-yellow honey bee. An attached, !2-bit
recorder captures the hive’s weight to within a 10th of
a pound, along with a daily register of relative ambient
humidity and temperature.

On this late January afternoon, during a
comparatively balmy respite between the blizzards that
dumped several feet of snow on the Middle Atlantic
states, the bees, their honey, and the wooden boxes in
which they live weigh 94.5 pounds. In mid-July, as last
year’s unusually long nectar flow finally ebbed, the
whole contraption topped out at 275 pounds, including
nearly 150 pounds of honey. “Right now, the colony is
in a cluster about the size of a soccer ball,” says Esaias,
who’s kept bees for nearly two decades and knows
without lifting the lid what's going on inside this hive.
“The center of the cluster is where the queen is, and
they’ re keeping her at 93 degrees —the rest are just
hanging there, tensing their flight muscles to generate
heat.” Provided that they have enough calories to fuel
their winter workout, a healthy colony can survive as
far north as Anchorage, Alaska. “They slowly eat their
way up through the winter,” he says. “It’s a race: Wil!
they eat all their honey before the nectar flows, or not?”
To make sure their charges win that race, apiarists have
long relied on scale hives for vital management clues.
By tracking daily weight variations, a beekeeper can

40 discern when the colony needs a nutritional boost to

carry it through lean times, whether to add extra combs
for honey storage and even detect incursions by
marauding robber bees—all without disturbing the
colony. A graph of the hive’s weight— which can

58

45 increase by as much as 35 pounds a day in some
parts of the United States during peak nectar flow —
reveals the date on which the bees’ foraging was
was most productive and provides a direct record of
successful pollination. “Around here, the bees make

50 their living in the month of May,” says Esaias, noting
that his bees often achieve daily spikes of 25 pounds,
the maximum in Maryland. “There’s almost no nectar
coming in for the rest of the year.” A scientist by
training and career oceanographer at NASA, Esaias

55 established the Mink Hollow Apiary in his Highland,
Maryland, backyard in 1992 with a trio of hand-me-
down hives and an antique platform scale much like
the one at the Beltsville bee lab. Ever since, he’s
maintained a meticulous record of the bees’ daily

60 weight, as well as weather patterns and such details
as his efforts to keep them healthy. In fate 2006,
honey bees nationwide began disappearing in an
ongoing syndrome dubbed colony collapse disorder
(CCD). Entire hives went empty as bees inexplicably

65 abandoned their young and their honey. Commercial
beekeepers reported losses up to 90 percent, and the
large-scale farmers who rely on honey bees to ensure
rich harvests of almonds, apples, and sunflowers
became very, very nervous. Looking for clues, Esaias

70 turned to his own records. While the resulting graphs
threw no light on the cause of CCD, a staggering
trend emerged: In the span of just 15 seasons, the date
on which his Mink Hollow bees brought home the
most nectar had shifted by two weeks—from late May

75 to the middle of the month. “I was shocked when I
plotted this up,” he says. “It was right under my nose,
going on the whole time.” The epiphany would lead
Esaias to launch a series of research collaborations,
featuring honey bees and other pollinators, to

80 investigate the relationships among plants, pollinators,
and weather patterns. Already, the work has begun
to reveal insights into the often unintended
consequences of human interventions in natural and
agricultural ecosystems, and exposed significant

85 gaps in how we understand the effect climate change
will have on everything from food production to
terrestrial ecology.

--- PAGE 58 ---
¥
4
$
q
@
By
:
5
¢
3
£

SPER TEAS

PRP ESOP REREAD Beh AS Bouse SO SER BEIGE NERS ROK

as

As used in line 41, “lean” most nearly means

A) tilted.
B) scarce.
C) compact.
D) sunken.

~

As used in line 42, “incursions” most nearly means

A) intentions.
B) introductions.
C) intrusions.
D) initiatives.

As used in lines 49-50, “make their living” most
nearly means

A) grow heavier.

B) accumulate funds.
C) behave aggressively.
D) are most productive.

As used in line 68, “rich” most nearly means

A) plentiful.
B) costly.
C) heavy.
D) fragrant.

59

--- PAGE 59 ---
10. The following passage is adapted from the novel
Summer by Edith Wharton, initially published in 1917,

The hours of the Hatchard Memorial librarian were
from three to five; and Charity Royall's sense of duty
usually kept her at her desk until nearly half-past four.
But she had never perceived that any practical

5 advantage thereby accrued either to North Dormer or to
herself; and she had no scruple in decreeing, when it
suited her, that the library should close an hour earlier.
A few minutes after Mr. Harney's departure she formed
this decision, put away her lace, fastened the shutters,

10 and turned the key in the door of the temple of
knowledge. The street upon which she emerged was
still empty: and after glancing up and down it she began
to walk toward her house. But instead of entering she
passed on, turned into a field-path and mounted to a

15 pasture on the hillside.

She let down the bars of the gate, followed a trail
along the crumbling wall of the pasture, and walked on
till she reached a knoll where a clump of larches shook
out their fresh tassels to the wind. There she lay down

20 on the slope, tossed off her hat and hid her face in the
grass. She was blind and insensible to many things, and
dimly knew it; but to all that was light and air, perfume
and color, every drop of blood in her responded. She
loved the roughness of the dry mountain grass under

25 her palms, the smell of the thyme into which she crushed
her face, the fingering of the wind in her hair and
through her cotton blouse, and the creak of the Jarches
as they swayed to it.

She often climbed up the hill and lay there alone for

30 the mere pleasure of feeling the wind and of rubbing her
cheeks in the grass. Generally at such times she did not
think of anything, but lay immersed in an inarticulate
well-being. Today the sense of well-being was
intensified by her joy at escaping from the library. She

35 liked well enough to have a friend drop in and talk to
her when she was on duty, but she hated to be bothered
about books. How could she remember where they
were, when they were so seldom asked for? Orma Fry
occasionally took out a novel, and her brother Ben was

40 fond of what he called “jography,” and of books
relating to trade and bookkeeping; but no one else asked
for anything except, at intervals, “Uncle Tom's Cabin,”
or “Opening of a Chestnut Burr,” or Longfellow. She
had these under her hand, and could have found them

45 in the dark; but unexpected demands came so rarely
that they exasperated her like an injustice....

She had liked the young man’s looks, and his short-

sighted eyes, and his odd way of speaking, that was abrupt

yet soft, just as his hands were sun-burnt and sinewy, yet

60

50 with smooth nails like a woman's. His hair was
sunburnt-looking too, or rather the colour of bracken
after frost; eyes grey, with the appealing look of the
shortsighted, his smile shy yet confident, as if he knew
lots of things she had never dreamed of, and yet

55 wouldn't for the world have had her feel his superiority.
But she did feel it, and liked the feeling; for it was new
to her. Poor and ignorant as she was, and knew herself
to be—humblest of the humble even in North Dormer,
where to come from the Mountain was the worst

60 disgrace —yet in her narrow world she had always ruled.
It was partly, of course, owing to the fact that lawyer
Royall was “the biggest man in North Dormer”; so
much too big for it, in fact, that outsiders, who didn't
know, always wondered how it held him. In spite of

65 everything—and in spite even of Miss Hatchard—
lawyer Royall ruled in North Dormer; and Charity ruled
in lawyer Royall’s house. She had never put it to herself
in those terms; but she knew her power. Confusedly, the
young man in the library had made her feel for the first

70 time what might be the sweetness of dependence. She
sat up and looked down on the house where she held
sway.

It stood just below her, cheerless and untended,
Behind the house a bit of uneven ground with clothes-

75 lines strung across it stretched up to a dry wall, and
beyond the walla patch of corn and a few rows of
potatoes strayed vaguely into the adjoining wilderness
of rock and fern.

As used in line 21 “blind” most nearly means

A) weak.

B) unaware,
C) modest.
D) careless.

As used in line 72, “sway” most nearly means

A) motion.
B) influence.
C) relief,

D) interest.

--- PAGE 60 ---
;

%
t
‘
&

Nepethe

:
5

ie a

(ORAS aie iP EIN ES

PRR eee hOB tance PN iri sie ft

SAN AMIR VARS

Explanations: Vocabulary in Context Exercises

Additional Frederick Douglass Questions

3. C

This is a good example of a question in which the word you are asked about is used in one of its
most common meanings — these do appear from time to time, and you should be careful not to
overthink them. In this case, Douglass sets up a contrast between men with ordinary faculties
(abilities, attributes) and brilliant examples of success. Logically, then, ordinary must mean the
opposite of “brilliant,” something along the lines of “dull” or “unexceptional.” C) is the closest
synonym for those words, making it the answer. The other options are all other common
meanings of ordinary, but none fits the context here.

4.B

Douglass is essentially saying that nature evens things out by making some people with humble
origins successful, and some people who started out with a lot of advantages less successful.
To keep something even, or balanced, is to “maintain” it. B) is thus correct. If that seems like too
much of a stretch, plug and in and play process of elimination. Nature cannot “purchase”
anything, and it does not make sense to say that nature “grasps” the balance. “Dominate” does
not fit either because something that is balanced is, by definition, evenly distributed.

End-of-Chapter Exercises

1.1C

This is essentially a straightforward second meanings question since the passage gives very little
context - a common second definition of seasoned is in fact “experienced,” which is consistent
with the meaning of the passage: judgment, even experienced judgment, plays no role in math
because an answer is always right or wrong. “Determined” and “tasteful” do not fit logically, and
“objective” is exactly the opposite of the correct idea.

2.1B

The phrase absorbed the new reality indicates that an old reality no longer held true. What was that
reality? That other planets in our solar system could easily be colonized. Logically, then, dispensed
must mean something like “got rid of.” B) is closest in meaning, so it is correct.

3.1C

The phrase millions of indigenous people were ousted (removed) from their homelands implies that the
nature sanctuaries did not contain people. Free of ltimans must therefore mean “devoid of
(without) humans.” You can also work by process of elimination. The answer must be negative,
and “liberated” and “whole” are both positive, “Uncompensated” (unpaid) is negative but does
not fit in context. That leaves C) as the only logical choice.

3.2D

The sentence in which the word coupled appears provides a second reason why conservationists
changed their approach towards the indigenous peoples whose habitats they were seeking to
save. In that context, “combined” is most logical: the combination of understanding the terrible
effects of displacement on indigenous peoples, and the recognition that indigenous peoples had a
positive effect on ecosystems, persuaded the conservationists to alter their perspective.

61

--- PAGE 61 ---
3.3 B

The fact that conservationists groups altered their treatment of indigenous peoples indicates that
conservationists were persuaded to “consider” -— that is, to take into account - the impact of local
human concerns,

4.1A

The previous sentence states that Alternative [explanations] quickly arose, so logically, the sentence
in which championed appears is describing one of those explanations. In addition, the phrase
Others asserted in the following sentence indicates that the word in question must be positive and
mean something similar to asserted. “ Advocated” is the closest synonym, so A) is correct. Playing
process of elimination, B) and D) are both negative and can be eliminated, and C) makes no sense
in the context of a discussion about the definition of species.

4.2C

The passage indicates that the discovery of DNA’s double helix caused, or led to, another
definition of the word species. Logically, then, the correct answer must be positive and convey the
idea of causation. The closest synonym for those words is “spurred,” so the answer is C).
“Rejected” is negative, and neither “elaborated” nor “defended” fits the required definition.

43A

The key phrase is minute (tiny) genetic differences, which indicates that finer must convey the idea
of something very small. The answer that comes closest to the required meaning is “narrower” —
such lines would indicate even more detailed criteria for distinguishing among species.
“Keener” (more perceptive), “milder” (less harsh), and “daintier” (more delicate and charming)
all do not fit.

5.1D

The passage indicates that citrus greening is a disease that essentially takes over trees. In that
context, “surrounding” is the only option that makes sense. In A), “nourishing” is exactly the
opposite of what you're looking for, and B) and C) don’t make sense when plugged in. The rotten
part of the tree isn’t “implanting” or “growing” the stems.

§.2C

The word in question refers to the orchards that were “chosen” to receive the potential cure for
citrus greening. Although this word is not an option, the correct answer must have a similar
meaning. Be careful with A) and B). Both “exclusive” and “preferred” are positive and imply that
the orchards chosen to receive the experimental technology were already special in some way,
but the passage does not indicate that that was the case. “Conventional” does not fit either -
things are usually described as “conventional” in order to set up a contrast with something new.
Here, the cure is innovative, not the orchards themselves. That leaves “particular,” which is
neutral and captures the idea that a few specific orchards have been selected.

6.1B

B) is a straightforward fit for a discussion of the brain - certain parts of that organ “control”
particular social skills. They do not “elect,” “charge,” or “require” those skills.

62

--- PAGE 62 ---
Oi hn oA PROBE 5

et al wmenegte

7.1D

The contradictor but in line 17 indicates that the statement before the semicolon forms a contrast
to the idea that Webster [has] a duty to perform, and [he] means to perform it. Essentially, Webster is
saying that he isn’t particularly qualified to speak for the preservation of the Union, but he’s
going to do so anyway. In this context, qualified most nearly means “suited.” If that definition
seems like too much of a leap, play process of elimination. All of the other options are too literal,
related to health and movement; none makes sense in a political context.

7.2B

The key words perform (line 18) and act (line 20) indicate that Webster thinks of himself as playing
a theatrical “role.” The other options are all based on the most common meaning of part - that is,
a portion - and do not make sense in context.

8.1 A

The sentence in which the word appears provides an important clue. The parallel structure of the
phrase instead of using software to tmanage photos, we can mine features indicates that mine is being
used as a synonym for using. In fact, “exploit” means “to make use of.” That meaning is
confirmed when the author describes all the information that bytes can be used to acquire.

8.2A

If you plugged in your own word here, you might say something like “show” or “expose.”
“Reveal” is closest in meaning to those words, so A) is correct. Consider also the image suggested
by the word unveil itself: a veil is a covering, and to pull off a veil is to reveal what is behind it.

8.3 C

The word predict in line 34 is an important clue, indicating that the correct answer must have a
similar meaning. “Foresaw” (literally, “saw before”) is closest in meaning, so it is correct.

9.1B

The phrase needs a nutritional boost provides an important clue. Why would colonies need a
nutritional boost? Because they aren’t getting a lot of nutrients. In other words, nutrients are
“scarce.” Even though C) might sound strange to you when it is plugged in, it is the only answer
that captures the correct meaning. “Tilted” and “sunken” can only be used to refer to the physical
placement of objects, and “compact” (small) does not quite fit the context.

9.2C

Don’t get distracted by the word tmarauder (raiders) - it doesn’t matter whether you know what it
means. Focus on the phrase robber bees, which tells you the correct answer must be negative. Only
“intrusions” is negative, so C) is correct.

9.3D

Esaias is talking about when honey production spikes, so the correct word must be positive and
consistent with the idea of a sharp increase. B) can be eliminated immediately because bees can’t
accumulate money. C) is negative and can be eliminated as well. Be careful with A): the amount
of honey the bees produce is increasing, not the weight of the bees themselves. D) correctly
indicates that the bees are most “productive,” i.e., they produce the most honey.

63

--- PAGE 63 ---
9.44

The passage is talking about improved harvests, so if you plugged in your own word, you'd
probably come up with something like “big” or “large.” “Plentiful” is just a fancier synonym for
those words, so it is correct. Be careful with B): “costly” means that the harvests themselves
would cost more, not that they would bring in more money. C) doesn’t quite fit because the focus
is on harvest size, not weight. And D) is incorrect because “fragrant” (having a pleasant odor) is
completely unrelated to harvest size.

10.1B

The word in question is linked to isensible (unknowing) by the word and, so it must have a
similar meaning. “Unaware” is the closest fit for that definition, so B) is correct,

If you’re not sure what insensible means, consider the slightly larger context. The word but after
the semicolon in line 22 indicates a contrast between the information before and after. Blind and
insensible are opposed to the things Charity does respond to fully (light and air), You can
therefore assume that the correct word must means something similar to “not knowing” or “not
responding.” If that doesn’t get you to the answer, work by process of elimination. “Weak” does
not make sense, so A) can be eliminated. C) does not fit either because the passage is focused on
Charity’s emotional state, not on her sense of humility or proper social conduct. D) also does not
fit because there is nothing to suggest that Charity is sloppy or does not pay attention. Again,
that leaves B) as the correct answer.

10.2 B
The key phrase is in lines 66-67, which indicate that Charity ruled in lawyer Royall’s house. In

that context, sway must mean something like “power.” The closest match for that definition is
“influence,” so B) is correct.

64

--- PAGE 64 ---
i
t
f
$
F
i
&
i
FA
i
;
b
&

t
i
+

a:

YEOSLIB ADOC omg

eC SRLNE MET BENG er eR EERE

intcahowRetroetar,

OMS MY OI AT FEE

ae merentt nnn anaes amt nS IRATE RCLEM Cap aNEG I? 4

Some albino animals have difficulty thriving in
the wild because {ij its skin is insufficiently dark to

absorb sunlight during harsh winters.

Making the Leap:
From Concrete to Abstract

Before we look more closely at the various question types, we’re going to examine a key
element of comprehension - namely, the ability to move between specific wording and more
abstract or general ideas. While you probably won't see many (if any) questions that directly
test this skill, it is nevertheless crucial for navigating challenging passages.

One of the most common ways that both the authors of SAT Reading passages and the test-
writers themselves move between specific phrasings and more general language is by using
pronouns (this, that) and abstract or compression nouns (notion, assertion, phenomenon).

If you've already spent some time preparing for the multiple-choice Writing and Language
portion of the SAT, you may be familiar with pronouns and antecedents (or referents), but
even if you are, here’s a refresher:

Pronoun = word that replaces a noun (e.g., she, he, it, they, this, that)

Antecedent/ Referent = noun to which a pronoun refers

As a matter of fact, the testing of pronouns and antecedents is one of the places where the
Reading and Writing Tests overlap, On the Writing and Language Test, the focus is
primarily on identifying disagreement errors between pronouns and their antecedents.

For example:

A) NO CHANGE
B) it’s

C) their

D) they’re

In the above sentence, the answer is C) because the singular pronoun it incorrectly refers to
the plural noun albino animals. (Choice B) can be eliminated because they’re = they are.)

Unfortunately, pronouns and antecedents tend to be less straightforward in Reading than in

Writing. In the above sentence, for example, the antecedent is right there ~ some albino animals
is the only noun to which its could logically refer.

65

--- PAGE 65 ---
Why Use Pronouns?

When it comes to Reading, determining which noun a particular pronoun refers to may
sometimes require more effort than you are accustomed to making; however, the heavy use
of pronouns is necessary in all but the simplest texts for reasons of style and clarity. It is
important that you be able to connect pronouns back to their referents because without the
ability to “track” an idea through a passage, you can easily lose track of the passage’s focus
and argument.

Compare the following two versions of this passage. First without pronouns:

. .Crowdsourcing is a wonderful tool, but crowdsourcing still fails in a very
particular way, which is that any evaluation is swayed by the evaluations that have
come before that evaluation. A barbershop with a one-star rating on Yelp as that
barbershop’s first review is subsequently more likely to accrue more negative
reviews—and that same barbershop, were that barbershop to receive a four-star
rating on Yelp as that barbershop’s first review, would be more likely to accrue
more subsequent positive reviews.

Notice how incredibly awkward and repetitive this version is. Now look at this version,
which replaces the repeated nouns with pronouns:

.. Crowdsourcing is a wonderful tool, but it still fails in a very particular way, which
is that any evaluation is swayed by the evaluations that have come before it. A
barbershop with a one-star rating on Yelp as its first review is subsequently more
likely to accrue more negative reviews — and that same barbershop, were it to receive
a four-star rating on Yelp as its first review, would be more likely to accrue more
subsequent positive reviews.

Notice how much smoother this version is. You don’t get tangled up in the constant
repetition of the same phrase, so it’s much easier to read.

Pronouns won't always appear by themselves, though. Typically, a pronoun such as this,
that, or these will appear in front of a noun, e.g., this notion, these movements, such developments.
Sounds a lot more straightforward, right? Well...maybe yes, maybe no.

Sometime around third grade, you probably learned that a noun was a person, place, or
thing. Pretty self-explanatory. When you learned that a noun was a “thing,” however, you
probably understood “thing” to mean an object like a bicycle or an apple or a house. That's
certainly true. But words like idea or assertion or concept - words that don’t refer to actual
physical objects ~ are also nouns. These nouns are sometimes referred to as abstract nouns
or compression nouns because they compress lots of information into a single word.

These types of words appear frequently in SAT passages, and understanding what they refer
to is often crucial to comprehension. In fact, the ability to recognize the relationship
between abstract nouns and the ideas that they refer to is central to making sense out of
many, if not most, passages. If you can’t draw the relationship between the noun, say,
phenomenon, and the specific occurrence that it refers to, you probably can’t answer a
question that asks you to do exactly that. And you certainly can’t answer a question that asks
you what can be inferred about or what sort of information would support it.

66

--- PAGE 66 ---
g
i
&
;
i
}
i
‘
i
Fi
i
'

SENATORS ggg BIN

i
i
i
&
s
?
s
8

Fd
:
i
g

i
&
:
g
;
$

10

15

What’s more, these nouns, like pronouns, may appear either before or after the particular
idea (argument, assertion, description, etc.) has been discussed, sometimes even in a
different paragraph. If you encounter a question that requires you to identify what such a
noun refers to, you must either continue reading to locate the necessary information, or more
frequently, back up and read from before the place where the noun appeared.

Very often, when students are confused about this type of phase, they either reread the
phrase in isolation and try to figure out what it’s talking about (impossible) or start reading
at the phrase and continue on for several lines, then become confused as to why they have
no clearer an understanding of the phrase than they did when they started. As a result, they
get caught in a loop of reading and rereading the wrong spot and, consequently, have no

reliable means of determining the correct answer.

Let’s look at an example. The phrase that includes the compression noun is in bold, and the

information that it refers to is underlined.

The world is complex and interconnected, and the
evolution of our communications system from a
broadcast model to a networked one has added a new
dimension to the mix. The Internet has made us all less
dependent on professional journalists and editors for
information about the wider world, allowing us to seek
out information directly via online search or to receive
it from friends through social media. But this enhanced
convenience comes with a considerable risk: that we
will be exposed to what we want to know at the expense
of what we need to know. While we can find virtual
communities that correspond to our every curiosity,
there’s little pushing us beyond our comfort zones
to or into the unknown, even if the unknown may have
serious implications for our lives. There are things we
should probably know more about —like political and
religious conflicts in Russia or basic geography. But even
if we knew more than we do, there’s no guarantee that
the knowledge gained would prompt us to act ina

20 particularly admirable fashion.

The phrase this enhanced convenience in lines 8-9 is a classic example of a compression noun. It

refers not to a single thing but rather to an entire idea presented in the sentence before it:

The Internet has made us all less dependent on professional journalists
and editors for information about the wider world, allowing us to seek out
information directly via online search or to receive it from friends through
social media.

To make something convenient is to make it easier or less troublesome. The phrase this
enhanced (improved) convenience refers to the fact that the Internet has made people’s lives
much easier because it allows them to obtain information on their own, eliminating their
dependence on others. The author avoids repeating all of that information by condensing it
into a mere three words.

67

--- PAGE 67 ---
If the author did not “compress” the information, the passage would read like this;

The Internet has made us all less dependent on professional journalists
and editors for information about the wider world, allowing us to seek out
information directly via online search or to receive it from friends through
social media. But the fact that the Internet has made us less dependent on
professional journalists and editors for information about the wider world,
allowing us to seek out information directly via online search or to receive it
from friends through social media, comes with a considerable risk...

In this version, the second sentence repeats all of the information from the first sentence,
creating an exceedingly long and awkward construction. In contrast, the phrase enhanced
convenience allows the author to present his ideas in a much clearer, more concise manner.

Let's look at another example:

Yogi Berra, the former Major League baseball
catcher and coach, once remarked that you can’t hit
and think at the same time. Of course, since he also
reportedly said, “I really didn’t say everything I said,”

5 itis not clear we should take his statements at face
value. Nonetheless, a widespread view — in both
academic journals and the popular press — is that
thinking about what you are doing, as you are doing it,
interferes with performance. The idea is that once you

10 have developed the ability to play an arpeggio on the
piano, putt a golf ball or parallel park, attention to what

you are doing leads to inaccuracies, blunders and
sometimes even utter paralysis. As the great

choreographer George Balanchine would say to his
15 dancers, “Don’t think, dear; just do.”

Perhaps you have experienced this destructive force
yourself, Start thinking about just how to carry a full
glass of water without spilling, and you’ll end up
drenched. How, exactly, do you initiate a telephone

20 conversation? Begin wondering, and before long, the
recipient of your call will notice the heavy breathing
and hang up. Our actions, the French philosopher
Maurice Merleau-Ponty tells us, exhibit a “magical”
efficacy, but when we focus on them, they degenerate

25 into the absurd. A [3-time winner on the Professional
Golfers Association Tour, Dave Hill, put it like this:
“You can’t be thinking about the mechanics of the sport
while you are performing.”

Here, there’s an additional twist. Not only does the phrase this destructive force refer to
information before it, but that information is in a different paragraph. If you encountered a
question that required you to understand what that phrase referred to and only read from
line 16 on, you would likely become confused. You might eventually find your way to the
answer, but you wouldn’t really be sure. If, on the other hand, you simply backed up and
read from the previous paragraph, things would be much more straightforward.

68

--- PAGE 68 ---
Br td a 4:
se, hens, gate

The Former and the Latter

One set of compression nouns that has a tendency to give people difficulty is “the former
and the latter.” Like other compression nouns, these nouns are used to refer back to words
or ideas mentioned earlier in the same sentence or in a previous sentence. The former is used
to refer back to the noun or phrase mentioned first, and the latter is used to refer back to the
noun or phrase mentioned second.

Let's start with a straightforward example:

In the nineteenth century, both Thomas Edison and Nikola Tesla were well-
known scientists, but the former is now considered one of the greatest American
inventors, while the latter has fallen into obscurity.

The beginning of the sentence refers to two individuals: Thomas Edison and Nikola Tesla. In
the second half of the sentence, the former refers to Edison because his name occurs first,
while the latter refers to Tesla because his name occurs second (latter is like later). That’s easy
enough to follow, but some passages may use these words in ways that you may have to
work somewhat harder to follow.

For example:

All bodies in the solar system are heated by sunlight. They rid themselves of this
heat in two ways: (1) by emitting infrared radiation and (2) by shedding matter. In
long-lived bodies such as Earth, the former process prevails; for others, such as
comets, the latter dominates.

Let’s look closely at what's going on in these sentences. (If this is an unfamiliar topic for you,
that’s all the better.) First, the author states that bodies in the solar system eliminate heat
from the sun in two ways. Next, he lists those two ways. The first way is by emitting infrared
radiation, and the second is by shedding matter. When he refers to those ways again in the
following sentence, the former = emitting infrared radiation, and the latter = shedding matter.

Therefore, the final sentence means that old planets like Earth eliminate heat by emitting
infrared radiation, but other objects like comets eliminate heat by shedding matter.

Note that occasionally, the latter may appear before the former. For example, the paragraph
above could be written the following way:

All bodies in the solar system are heated by sunlight. They rid themselves of this
heat in two ways: (1) by emitting infrared radiation and (2) by shedding matter.
For some objects such as comets, the latter dominates; in long-lived bodies such as
Earth, the former process prevails.

Although the order of the former and the latter is switched, the last sentence has exactly the
same meaning it had in the previous version.

69

--- PAGE 69 ---
Pronoun and Compression Noun Exercises

Directions: underline the word, phrase, or lines in the passage to which the compression
noun in each sentence refers,

1. What drives traffic on most “news” websites is not
journalism but a combination of snark and celebrity
clickbait. Much of it is churned out in soul-destroying
content factories manned by inexperienced —and
therefore inexpensive— young people without the time
or incentive to dig deeply into anything. This deficit is
particularly acute where it matters most: in the kind of
expensive, far-flung reporting that is either dangerous
to the lives of those doing the work or harmful to the
10 bottom lines of the publications paying for it. The idea
that readers will pay the actual cost of meaningful
journalism has never been sustainable in the United
States and has brought down nearly every entity that has
tried to depend on it.

What does “this deficit” (line 6) refer to?

w

What does “‘it” (line 14) refer to?

2. While humpback dolphins look quite similar to
other dolphins, their genetics tells a different story.
Researchers collected 235 tissue samples and 180
skulls throughout the animals’ distribution, representing
the biggest dataset assembled to date for the animals.
The team analyzed mitochondrial and nuclear DNA
from the tissue, which revealed significant variations.
Although the line between species, sub-species and
populattons is a blurry one, in this case, the researchers
10 are confident that the humpback dolphin is distinct
enough to warrant the “species” title. The mitochondrial
DNA turned up genetic signatures distinct enough to
signal a separate species, and likewise, differences in
the dolphins’ skulls supported this divergence. Although
15 the nuclear DNA provided a slightly more confounding
picture, it still clearly showed differences between the
four species.

wn

What does “this divergence” (line 14) refer to?

What does “it” (line 16) refer to?

3. Soon after the Big Bang, there were tiny ripples:
quantum fluctuations in the density of the seething ball
of hot plasma. Billions of years later, those seeds have
grown into galaxy clusters — sprawling groups of

5 hundreds or thousands of galaxies bound together by
gravity. But there seems to be a mismatch, Results
released last year suggest that as much as 40% of
galaxy-cluster mass is missing when compared with
the amount of clustering predicted by the ripples.

10 The findings have led theorists to propose physics
beyond the standard model of cosmology to make up
the difference.

What do “those seeds” (line 3) refer to?

What do “the findings” (line 10) refer to?

70

--- PAGE 70 ---
SSadEaSBSAR epg

Fa
X
:
&
x
é
E
&
z
é
£
Ba
2
:
t

g
4
i
&
g
x
4
%
S
é
&
s

DRS ARSE VNC DY AR aI

i
5
3
2
4

fat

MAN ABA SEEMS AY LEEA RES EON ONE NRO DAREW SSIS LEME IN SELLE EBSA DIES GEIR AEB LES EAGAN IESE STEREO I

SawterswesomnerAl

ASP OGM S Ty CE te acne

———e eS ee

4,

10

10

15

20

Conservationists have historically been at odds
with the people who inhabit wildernesses. During the
fast half of the 20th century, millions of indigenous
people were ousted from their homelands to establish
nature sanctuaries free of humans. Most succumbed to
malnutrition, disease and exploitation. Such outcomes —
coupled with the realization that indigenous groups
usually help to stabilize ecosystems by, for instance,
keeping fire at bay—have convinced major conservation
groups to take local human concerns into account. The
World Wildlife Fund (WWE) now describes indigenous
peoples as “natural allies,” and the Nature Conservancy
pledges to seek their “free, informed and prior” consent
to projects impacting their territories.

The starlings show up over Rome around dusk,
heading for their roosts after a day of feeding in the
countryside. In flocks of several hundred to several
thousand, they form sinuous streams, whirling
cylinders, cones or ribbons spread across the sky like
giant flags. Wheeling and dipping together, they
reminded Andrea Cavagna, a physicist at the National
Research Council of Italy, of atoms falling into place
in a superfluid state of matter called a Bose-Einstein
condensate, Out of curiosity, Cavagna deployed a
camera to record the flights. As a particle physicist, he
says, “it was refreshing to work with something you
can actually see.” But keeping track of a thousand birds
turned out to be much more complicated than a billion
billion atoms.

Cavagna was hardly the first scientist to be intrigued
by these acrobatics— known, in a rare instance of
technical language coinciding with poetry, as
“murmurations.” Other animals that travel in groups—
schooling fish, most obviously —show the same
uncanny ability to move in apparent unison away from
a predator or toward a food source.

71

What does “such outcomes” (line 5) refer to?

What does “they” (line 4) refer to?

What do “these acrobatics” (line 17) refer to?

--- PAGE 71 ---
6.

10

45

20

25

ae

5

10

45

20

I wish to speak to-day, not as a Massachusetts
man, nor as a Northern man, but as an American, and
a member of the Senate of the United States. It is
fortunate that there is a Senate of the United States;
a body not yet moved from its propriety, not lost to a just
sense of its own dignity and its own high responsibilities,
and a body to which the country looks, with confidence,
for wise, moderate, patriotic, and healing counsels.
It is not to be denied that we live in the midst of strong
agitations, and are surrounded by very considerable
dangers to our institutions and government, The
imprisoned winds are let loose. The East, the North,
and the stormy South combine to throw the whole sea
into commotion, to toss its billows to the skies, and
disclose its profoundest depths, [ do not affect to regard
myself, Mr. President, as holding, or as fit to hold, the
helm in this combat with the political elements; but I
have a duty to perform, and I mean to perform it with
fidelity, not without a sense of existing dangers, but not
without hope. I have a part to act, not for my own
security or safety, for I am looking out for no fragment
upon which to float away from the wreck, if wreck there
must be, but for the good of the whole, and the
preservation of all; and there is that which will keep me
to my duty during this struggle, whether the sun and the
stars shall appear, or shall not appear for many days.
I speak to-day for the preservation of the Union.

Chimps do it, birds do it, even you and I do it.
Once you see someone yawn, you are compelled to
do the same. Now it seems that wolves can be added
to the list of animals known to spread yawns like a
contagion.

Among humans, even thinking about yawning can
trigger the reflex, leading some to suspect that catching
a yawn is linked to our ability to empathize with other
humans. For instance, contagious yawning activates the
same parts of the brain that govern empathy and social
know-how. And some studies have shown that humans
with more fine-tuned social skills are more likely to catch
a yawn,

Similarly, chimpanzees, baboons and bonobos
often yawn when they see other members of their species
yawning. Chimps (Pan troglodytes) can catch yawns
from humans, even virtual ones. At least in primates,
contagious yawning seems to require an emotional
connection and may function as a demonstration of
empathy. Beyond primates, though, the trends are less
clear-cut. One study found evidence of contagious
yawning in birds but didn’t connect it to empathy.

72

What does “a body” (lines 5 and 7) refer to?

What does “its” (lines 14 and 15) refer to?

What does “it” (line 18) refer to?

What do “the trends” (line 20) refer to?

What does “it” (line 22) refer to?

--- PAGE 72 ---
8. It was one hundred and forty-four years ago that
members of the Democratic Party first met in
convention to select a Presidential candidate. A lot of
years passed since 1832, and during that time it would

5 have been most unusual for any national political party
to ask a Barbara Jordan to deliver a keynote address. i
But tonight, here | am. And I feel that notwithstanding i e
the past that my presence here is one additional bit of What does “this grand distinction” (line 11)
evidence that the American Dream need not forever be .
refer to?

10 deferred,

Now that I have this grand distinction, what in the
world am I supposed to say? I could list the problems
which cause people to feel cynical, angry, frustrated:
problems which include lack of integrity in government;

15 the feeling that the individual no longer counts; feeling
that the grand American experiment is failing or has
failed. I could recite these problems, and then I could
sit down and offer no solutions. But I don’t choose to do
that either. The citizens of America expect more.

9. The most ancient of all societies, and the only
one that is natural, is the family: and even so the
children remain attached to the father only so long as
they need him for their preservation. As soon as this

5 need ceases, the natural bond is dissolved. The children, i ae
released from the obedience they owed to the father, and i “ ote ;
the father, released from the care he owed his children, What does “they” (line 9) refer to?
return equally to independence. If they remain united,
they continue so no longer naturally, but voluntarily; and

10 the family itself is then maintained only by convention.

This common liberty results from the nature of man.
His first law is to provide for his own preservation, his
first cares are those which he owes to himself; and, as
soon as he reaches years of discretion, he is the sole

15 judge of the proper means of preserving himself, and
consequently becomes his own master.

The family then may be called the first model of
political societies: the ruler corresponds to the father,
and the people to the children; and all, being born free

20 and equal, alienate their liberty only for their own
advantage. The whole difference is that, in the family,
the love of the father for his children repays him for the
care he takes of them, while, in the State, the pleasure of
commanding takes the place of the love which the chief

25 cannot have for the peoples under him.

What does “this common liberty” (line 11) refer to?

ne Raat, setae apa

GUERIN in RESPIR AE ONES

g
f
3
4

73

--- PAGE 73 ---
10. The sharing economy is a little like online
shopping, which started in America I5 years ago. At
first, people were worried about security. But having
made a successful purchase from, say, Amazon, they

5 felt safe buying elsewhere. Similarly, using Airbnb or

a car-hire service for the first time encourages people to
try other offerings. Next, consider eBay. Having started
out as a peer-to-peer marketplace, it is now dominated
by professional “power sellers” (many of whom started

10 out as ordinary eBay users). The same may happen with
the sharing economy, which also provides new
opportunities for enterprise. Some people have bought
cars solely to rent them out, for example. Incumbents
are getting involved too. Avis, a car-hire firm, has a share

15 ina sharing rival. So do GM and Daimler, two carmakers.

In the future, companies may develop hybrid models,
listing excess capacity (whether vehicles, equipment or
office space) on peer-to-peer rental sites. In the past,
new ways of doing things online have not displaced the

20 old ways entirely. But they have often changed them.
Just as internet shopping forced Walmart and Tesco to
adapt, so online sharing will shake up transport, tourism,
equipment-hire and more.

The main worry is regulatory uncertainty. Will

25 room-4-renters be subject to hotel taxes, for example?
In Amsterdam officials are using Airbnb listings to track
down unlicensed hotels. In some American cities,
peer-to-peer taxi services have been banned after
lobbying by traditional taxi firms. The danger is that

30 although some rules need to be updated to protect
consumers from harm, incumbents will try to destroy
competition. People who rent out rooms should pay tax,
of course, but they should not be regulated like a Ritz-
Carlton hotel. The lighter rules that typically govern

35 bed-and-breakfasts are more than adequate. The sharing
economy is the latest example of the internet’s value to
consumers. This emerging model is now big and
disruptive enough for regulators and companies to have
woken up to it. That is a sign of its immense potential. It

40 is time to start caring about sharing.

teremeryeiteart eremepnruenetrseerenrmanim tern meen trinartrenmrraa a ihmtenerteppasbwmmnreraemunaytmeens ners payermimenepsnapemiens rant erstpeererreriesf WEernnRan{e{POpeerArrericun4sptprerreni Neh? RAS TnArrntiis=rerncsteteQh H=natistetneiSIMA=s RP HOSSIA PF DIALS rte MSSCeStsL IAS ERDN SGA ENDL ENR

74

What does “it” (line 8) refer to?

What do “they” and “them” (line 20) refer to?

What does “this emerging model” (line 37)
refer to?

--- PAGE 74 ---
ROHN WAIL NAAM

ait Ving AN LD BMT ERLE ICING NITE PONTE S98 BRIER ah

;
‘
5
i
i
i
i
:
\
i

11,

The following passage is adapted from “Scientists
Discover Salty Aquifer, Previously Unknown Microbial
Habitat Under Antarctica,” © 2015 by Dartmouth College.

Using an airborne imaging system for the first time
in Antarctica, scientists have discovered a vast network
of unfrozen salty groundwater that may support previously
unknown microbial life deep under the coldest, driest

5 desert on our planet. The findings shed new light on

ancient climate change on Earth and provide strong
evidence that a similar briny aquifer could support
microscopic life on Mars. The scientists used SkyTEM,
an airborne electromagnetic sensor, to detect and map

10 otherwise inaccessible subterranean features.

15

20

25

The system uses an antennae suspended beneath
a helicopter to create a magnetic field that reveals the
subsurface to a depth of about | ,000 feet. Because a
helicopter was used, large areas of rugged terrain could
be surveyed. The SkyTEM team was funded by the
National Science Foundation and led by researchers
from the University of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK), and
Dartmouth College, which oversees the NSF's Sky TEM
project.

“These unfrozen materials appear to be relics of
past surface ecosystems and our findings provide
compelling evidence that they now provide deep
subsurface habitats for microbial life despite extreme
environmental conditions,” says lead author Jill Mikucki,
an assistant professor at UTK. “These new below-
ground visualization technologies can also provide insight
on glacial dynamics and how Antarctica responds to
climate change.”

Co-author Dartmouth Professor Ross Virginia is

30 SkyTEM’s co-principal investigator and director of

Dartmouth's Institute of Arctic Studies. “This project is
studying the past and present climate to, in part,
understand how climate change in the future will affect
biodiversity and ecosystem processes,” Virginia says.

35 “This fantastic new view beneath the surface will help

40

us sort out competing ideas about how the McMurdo
Dry Valleys have changed with time and how this history
influences what we see today.”

The researchers found that the unfrozen brines form
extensive, interconnected aquifers deep beneath glaciers
and lakes and within permanently frozen soils. The
brines extend from the coast to at least 7.5 miles inland
in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, the largest ice-free region
in Antarctica, The brines could be due to freezing and/or

45 deposits. The findings show for the first time that the

Dry Valleys’ lakes are interconnected rather than isolated;
connectivity between lakes and aquifers is important in
sustaining ecosystems through drastic climate change,
such as lake dry-down events. The findings also challenge

75

50 the assumption that parts of the ice sheets below the
pressure melting point are devoid of liquid water.

In addition to providing answers about the biological
adaptations of previously unknown ecosystems that
persist in the extreme cold and dark of the Antarctic

55 winter, the new study could help scientists to
understand whether similar conditions might exist
elsewhere in the solar system, specifically beneath the
surface of Mars, which has many similarities to the
Dry Valleys. Overall, the Dry Valleys ecosystem —

60 cold, vegetation-free and home only to microscopic
animal and plant life — resembles, during the Antarctic
summer, conditions on the surface on Mars.

SkyTEM produced images of Taylor Valley along
the Ross Sea that suggest briny sediments exist at

65 subsurface temperatures down to perhaps -68°F,
which is considered suitable for microbial life. One of
the studied areas was lower Taylor Glacier, where the
data suggest ancient brine still exists beneath the
glacier. That conclusion is supported by the presence

70 of Blood Falls, an iron-rich brine that seeps out of the
glacier and hosts an active microbial ecosystem.

Scientists’ understanding of Antarctica's
underground environment is changing dramatically as
research reveals that subglacial lakes are widespread

75 and that at least half of the areas covered by the ice

sheet are akin to wetlands on other continents. But
groundwater in the ice-free regions and along the
coastal margins remains poorly understood.

a

What do “the findings” (line 5) refer to?

What does “this history” (line 37) refer to?

What does “that conclusion” (line 69) refer to?

--- PAGE 75 ---
12, This passage is adapted from Sharon Tregaskis, “What
Bees Tell Us About Global Climate Change,” © 2010
by Johns Hopkins Magazine.

Standing in the apiary on the grounds of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture’s Bee Research Laboratory
in Beltsville, Maryland, Wayne Esaias digs through the
canvas shoulder bag leaning against his leg in search of

5 the cable he uses to download data. It’s dusk as he runs
the cord from his laptop—precariously perched on the
beam of a cast-iron platform scale—to a small, battery-
operated data logger attached to the spring inside the
scale’s steel column. In the 1800s, a scale like this

10 would have weighed sacks of grain or crates of apples,
peaches, and melons. Since arriving at the USDA’s bee
Jab in January 2007, this scale has been loaded with a
single item: a colony of Apis mellifera, the fuzzy,
black-and-yellow honey bee. An attached, 12-bit

15 recorder captures the hive’s weight to within a 10th of
a pound, along with a daily register of relative ambient
humidity and temperature.

On this late January afternoon, during a
comparatively balmy respite between the blizzards that

20 dumped several feet of snow on the Middle Atlantic
states, the bees, their honey, and the wooden boxes in
which they live weigh 94.5 pounds. In mid-July, as last
year’s unusually long nectar flow finally ebbed, the
whole contraption topped out at 275 pounds, including

25 nearly 150 pounds of honey. “Right now, the colony is
in a cluster about the size of a soccer ball,” says Esaias,
who's kept bees for nearly two decades and knows
without lifting the lid what's going on inside this hive.
“The center of the cluster is where the queen is, and

30 they’re keeping her at 93 degrees —the rest are just
hanging there, tensing their flight muscles to generate
heat.” Provided that they have enough calories to fuel
their winter workout, a healthy colony can survive as
far north as Anchorage, Alaska. “They slowly eat their

35 way up through the winter,” he says. “It’s a race: Will
they eat all their honey before the nectar flows, or not?”
To make sure their charges win that race, apiarists have
long relied on scale hives for vital management clues.
By tracking daily weight variations, a beekeeper can

40 discern when the colony needs a nutritional boost to
carry it through lean times, whether to add extra combs
for honey storage and even detect incursions by
marauding robber bees ~—all without disturbing the
colony. A graph of the hive’s weight— which can

45 increase by as much as 35 pounds a day in some
parts of the United States during peak nectar flow —
reveals the date on which the bees’ foraging was
was most productive and provides a direct record of
successful pollination. “Around here, the bees make

50 their living in the month of May,” says Esaias, noting
that his bees often achieve daily spikes of 25 pounds,
the maximum in Maryland. “There’s almost no nectar
coming in for the rest of the year.” A scientist by
training and career oceanographer at NASA, Esaias

55 established the Mink Hollow Apiary in his Highland,
Maryland, backyard in 1992 with a trio of hand-me-
down hives and an antique platform scale much like
the one at the Beltsville bee lab. Ever since, he’s
maintained a meticulous record of the bees’ daily

60 weight, as well as weather patterns and such details
as his efforts to keep them healthy. In late 2006,
honey bees nationwide began disappearing in an
ongoing syndrome dubbed colony collapse disorder
(CCD). Entire hives went empty as bees inexplicably

65 abandoned their young and their honey. Commercial
beekeepers reported losses up to 90 percent, and the
large-scale farmers who rely on honey bees to ensure
rich harvests of almonds, apples, and sunflowers
became very, very nervous. Looking for clues, Esaias

70 turned to his own records. While the resulting graphs
threw no light on the cause of CCD, a staggering
trend emerged: In the span of just 15 seasons, the date
on which his Mink Hollow bees brought home the
most nectar had shifted by two weeks —from late May

75 to the middle of the month. “I was shocked when I
plotted this up,” he says. “It was right under my nose,
going on the whole time.” The epiphany would lead
Esaias to launch a series of research collaborations,
featuring honey bees and other pollinators, to

80 investigate the relationships among plants, pollinators,
and weather patterns. Already, the work has begun
to reveal insights into the often unintended
consequences of human interventions in natural and
agricultural ecosystems, and exposed significant

85 gaps in how we understand the effect climate change
will have on everything from food production to
terrestrial ecology.

What does “the epiphany” (line 77) refer to?

What does “the work” (line 81) refer to?

76

--- PAGE 76 ---
PBS AGS

iO RANMA IRIN, Ch

“Sep akan imagers,

Explanations: Pronoun and Compression Noun Exercises

1.1 This deficit = news websites’ combination of snark and celebrity clickbait.,..churned out...by young
people without the time or incentive to dig deeply into anything (lines 1-6).

1.2 It = The idea that readers will pay the actual cost of meaningful journalism

2.1 This divergence = the fact that humpback dolphins are a separate dolphin species, as
indicated by the differences in mitochondrial DNA. (lines 8-13)

2.2 It = the nuclear DNA (line 15)

3.1 Those seeds = tiny ripples: quantum fluctuations in the density of the seething ball of hot plasma.
(lines 1-3)

3.2 The findings = results indicating that 40% of galaxy-cluster mass is missing when compared with

the amount of clustering predicted by the ripples. (lines 6-9)

4.1 Such outcomes = millions of indigenous people were ousted from their homelands to establish nature
sanctuaries free of humans, Most succiumbed to malnutrition, disease and exploitation. (lines 2-5)

5.1 They = The starlings (line 1)

5.2 These acrobatics = The birds’ movements: sinuous streams, whirling cylinders, cones or ribbons
spread across the sky like giant flags. (lines 4-6)

6.1 A body = the Senate

6.2 Its = the whole sea’s (line 13)

6.3 It =a duty (line 18)

7.1 The trends = At least in primates, contagious yawning seems to require an emotional connection and
may function as a demonstration of empathy, (lines 17-20)

7.2 It = contagious yawning (lines 21-22)

8.1 This grand distinction = the selection of Barbara Jordan to deliver the Democratic keynote
address (lines 3-7)

9.1 They = The father and the children (lines 6-7)

9.2 This common liberty = the fact that a father and children can voluntarily decide whether to
maintain ties after the children are no longer dependent on the father for survival. (lines 8-10)

ras

--- PAGE 77 ---
10.1 It = eBay (line 7)

10.2 They = the new ways; them = the old ways (lines 18-20)

10.3 This emerging model = the sharing economy (lines 35-36)

11.1 The findings = the discovery of a vast network of unfrozen salty groundwater that may support
previously unknown microbial life deep under the coldest, driest desert on our planet. (lines 2-5)

11.2 This history = how the McMurdo Dry Valleys have changed with time (lines 36-37)

11.3 That conclusion = ancient brine still exists beneath the glacier (line 68)

12.1 The epiphany = Esaias’s realization that in the span of just 15 seasons, the date on which his
Mink Hollow bees brought home the most nectar had shifted by two weeks — from late May to the middle of
the month. (lines 72-75)

12.2 The work = a series of research collaborations, featuring honey bees and other pollinators, to
investigate the relationships among plants, pollinators, aud weather patterns (lines 78-81)

78

--- PAGE 78 ---
:
:
4
i
s
Hi
i
r

:
x
$

a BCCI ASEM

ee

PRN RMN pe OS SEIN eTE RE

DO AROO NS NO oats aH ARIT PBS Ke” FRAT

tani:

The Big Picture

Every SAT will have a number of questions that test your understanding of the passage as a
whole (or, in some cases, large sections of it). These question may ask you to identify which
statement best summarizes a passage/section of a passage, or they may ask you to
recognize an author’s point or central claim. While these questions are worded in a
straightforward manner, they can also be challenging because they require a leap from the
concrete, specific details of a passage to an understanding of its broader themes.

It’s no surprise, then, that I’ve had to spend a lot of time teaching people to stop looking so
hard at the details. It’s not that there’s anything wrong with details - it’s just that they’re not
always terribly relevant, or even relevant at all. Very often, smart, detail-oriented students
have a tendency to worry about every single thing that sounds even remotely odd while
missing something major staring them in the face. Frequently, they blame this on the fact
that they’ve been taught in English class to read closely and pay attention to all the details.

Well, I have some news: when you're in college with a 500-page reading assignment that you
have two days to get through, you won't have time to annotate every last detail - nor will
your professors expect you to. Whether or not you're truly interested in what you're reading,
your job will be to get the gist of the author’s argument and then focus on a few key areas.
And if you can’t recognize those key areas, college reading will be, shall we say, a challenge.
Unlike the books you are assigned in high school English class, most of what you read in
college will not have easily-digestible summaries available courtesy of sparknotes.com.

But back to the SAT.

It’s fairly common for people to simply grind to a halt when they encounter an unfamiliar
turn of phrase. When they realize they haven't quite understood a line, they go back and
read it again. If they still don’t quite get it, they read it yet again. And before they know it,
they’ve wasted two or three minutes just reading the same five lines over and over again.
Then they start to run out of time and have to rush through the last few questions.

Almost inevitably, you will encounter some passages with bits that aren’t completely clear -
that's part of the test. The goal is to see whether you can figure out their meaning from the
general context - you’re not expected to get every word, especially not the first time around.
If you get the gist, you can figure a lot of other things out, whereas if you focus on one little
detail, you'll get . . . one little detail.

79

--- PAGE 79 ---
10

15

20

25

Identifying Topics

The topic is the person, thing, or idea that is the primary subject or focus of the passage. In
most cases, the topic is the word or phrase that appears most frequently throughout the
passage, either by name or in rephrased form (pronoun or compression noun). For
example, a computer could also be referred to as “the machine,” “the invention,” or “the
technology.”

Normally, the topic will be introduced in the introduction ~ that, after all, is the purpose of
an introduction. if you’re not sure about the topic, the first sentence is usually a good place
to start. If it isn’t mentioned there, it will almost always be found in the next few sentences.

While this discussion might sound very basic, the ability to identify topics is crucial
because correct answer choices will refer to the topic. In fact, the correct answer will
sometimes be the only answer choice to mention the topic. Furthermore, many incorrect
answers are wrong because they are off-topic, and you cannot recognize when a statement is
off-topic unless you know what the topic is.

Let’s look at an example of how that could play out in a passage.

Citrus greening, the plague that could wipe out
Florida's $9 billion orange industry, begins with the
touch of a jumpy brown bug on a sun-kissed leaf.
From there, the bacterial disease incubates in the
tree’s roots, then moves back up the trunk in full force,
causing nutrient flows to seize up. Leaves turn yellow,
and the oranges, deprived of sugars from the leaves,
remain green, sour, and hard. Many fall before harvest,
brown necrotic flesh ringing failed stems.

For the past decade, Florida's oranges have been
literally starving. Since it first appeared in 2005,
citrus greening, also known by its Chinese name,
huanglongbing, has swept across Florida’s groves
like a flood. With no hills to block it, the Asian citrus
psyllid—the invasive aphid relative that carries the
disease—has infected nearly every orchard in the
state, By one estimate, 80 percent of Florida’s citrus
trees are infected and declining.

The disease has spread beyond Florida to nearly
every orange-growing region in the United States.
Despite many generations of breeding by humanity,
no citrus plant resists greening; it afflicts lemons,
prapefruits, and other citrus species as well. Once a
tree is infected, it will die. Yet in a few select Floridian
orchards, there are now trees that, thanks to innovative
technology, can fight the greening tide.

In the passage above, the topic ~ citrus greening - is introduced in the very first sentence.
In the entire remainder of the passage, it is only referred to by name one additional time
(line 12). It is, however, referred to in many other ways: the plague, the disease, the bacterial
disease, hunaglongbing, the greening tide and, of course, it.

80

--- PAGE 80 ---
t
H
i
#

LP REN CREEL NON

seis dale Ya yippee AIDA he

ih eB Yay iti RE

$
‘
'
|

If you have difficulty drawing the connection between the original term and its many
variations, you can end up not fully understanding what the passage is about. You may also
misunderstand the scope of the passage - that is, whether it’s general or specific.

Often, when asked for the topic of a passage such as this, students say things like,
“Ummm... I think it talks about oranges and stuff,” or “it mentions Florida,” or, a bit closer
to the mark, “diseases.”

Incidentally, I’ve witnessed this type of uncertainty even in high-scoring students. They
know the test well enough to spot wrong answers to detail questions, but when asked to
state something as straightforward as the topic in their own words, they’re suddenly lost.

As a matter of fact, the topic is not in fact “diseases.” It is actually one specific disease,
namely citrus greening. That fact can become very important if you see a question like this:

The references to yellow leaves and green, sour, and
hard oranges in lines 6-9 primarily serve to

Citrus greening, the plague that could wipe out
Florida's $9 billion orange industry, begins with the
touch of a jumpy brown bug on a sun-kissed leaf.
From there, the bacterial disease incubates in the

5 tree’s roots, then moves back up the trunk in full force,
causing nutrient flows to seize up. Leaves turn yellow,
and the oranges, deprived of sugars from the leaves,
remain green, sour, and hard. Many fall before harvest,
brown necrotic flesh ringing failed stems.

A) describe some effects of citrus greening.

B) point out the consequence of giving plants too
many nutrients.

C) suggest that farmers often harvest their crops
too early.

D) demonstrate the difficulty of growing crops
in a humid climate.

‘panasemneesechemmurerteticttbet tet ites gamers maaatenmenhrete the PePel eee HAA SLOMAN

The only answer that directly refers to the passage’s topic is A), which is correct. Yes, this is a
fairly straightforward question, but using the big picture lets you jump right to the answer.

To reiterate this for yourself, try an exercise: take a page from a book or piece of writing
you're familiar with, one whose topic you know for sure. Now, as fast as you can, count how
many times that topic - either the noun itself or a rephrased version of it - appears on the
page. The number should be pretty high. Since you're already familiar with the subject, it
should be easier for you to see the relationship between the topic and the various ways that
it’s referred to throughout the text. If you find it helpful, keep repeating this exercise until
you can consistently identity topics quickly and accurately.

Important: when defining a topic, try to use no more than a couple of words (e.g., effects of
social media, ant nests, women’s equality) and avoid saying things like, “Well, so I think that
basically the passage is like talking about xyz...” The former takes almost no time and gives
you exactly the information you need; the latter is time-consuming, vague, and encourages
you to view the topic as much more subjective than it actually is.

81

--- PAGE 81 ---
What’s the Point?

The point of a passage is the primary idea that the author wants to convey. After the topic,
the point should be the first thing you look for when you read a passage. Once you have
identified it and underlined it or written it down, you can often skim through the rest of the
passage - but before that, finding it needs to be your main goal.

I cannot state this strongly enough: If you keep the main point in mind, you can often
eliminate answers simply because they do not make sense in context of it or, better yet,
identify the correct answer because it is the only option that is consistent with it.

What's more, focusing on finding the point means you don’t have a chance to get
distracted. It reduces the chance that you'll spend five minutes trying to absorb three lines
while losing sight of the big idea. And it stops you from wasting energy trying to convince
yourself that the passage is interesting when you're actually bored out of your mind.
But let me begin by saying what a main point is not:

* Itis not a topic such as “bears” or “the rise of social media.”

* Itis nota theme such as “oppression” or “overcoming.”
A main point is an argument that answers the question “so what?” It tells us why the author
thinks the topic is important, or what primary information about a topic he or she wants to
convey to the reader.
You can use this “formula” to determine the point:

Topic + So What? = Main Point

Sometimes the author will directly state the main point in the passage itself, most often in
the introduction or beginning of the second paragraph, and then again for emphasis at the

end of the conclusion.

When you find the point, you should underline it immediately. If the author does not state
the point directly, you should write it yourself.

It isn’t terribly effective to discuss main points in the abstract, so on the next page, we're
going to look at a passage.

82

--- PAGE 82 ---
:
E
3
t

;
;

Fs
&
i

/
é
Fa
3
3
§
&
*
g

&
bd
$

tram ninn tan nTA es

ged ORD ROR OTR OEE

ARN ha AED He

10

is

20

Sometime near the end of the Pleistocene, a band
of people left northeastern Asia, crossed the Bering
land bridge when the sea level was low, entered
Alaska and became the first Americans. Since the
1930s, archaeologists have thought these people were
members of the Clovis culture. First discovered in
New Mexico in the 1930s, the Clovis culture is known
for its distinct stone tools, primarily fluted projectile
points. For decades, Clovis artifacts were the oldest
known in the New World, dating to 13,000 years ago.
But in recent years, researchers have found more and
more evidence that people were living in North and
South America before the Clovis.

The most recently confirmed evidence comes from
Washington. During a dig conducted from 1977 to 1979,
researchers uncovered a bone projectile point stuck in
a mastodon rib. Since then, the age of the find has been
debated, but recently anthropologist Michael Waters
and his colleagues announced a new radiocarbon date
for the rib: 13,800 years ago, making it 800 years older
than the oldest Clovis artifact. Other pre-Clovis
evidence comes from a variety of locations across the
New World.

In my experience, many students are not entirely clear on the difference between describing
the content of a passage and summarizing its argument. Because the ability to summarize
arguments quickly and accurately is one of the most crucial skills for success on SAT
Reading, this confusion can become a major stumbling block.

Describing content = recounting the information presented in the text, often in
sequential “first x, then y, and finally z’ form, without necessarily distinguishing
between main points and supporting evidence.

Summarizing an argument = identifying the essential point that the author wants to
convey and eliminating any unnecessary detail. The goal is not to cover all of the
information presented or to relate it in the sequence it appears in the passage, but rather
to pinpoint the overarching idea that encapsulates the author’s point.

Summarizing arguments requires you to make a leap from concrete to abstract because you
must move beyond simply recounting the information presented to recognizing which parts
are most important and relating them to other, more general ideas.

In order to make this leap, you must be able to separate the larger, more important ideas
(which usually appear at the beginning and the end of a paragraph) from the details and
supporting evidence (which usually appear in the middle of a paragraph). If you are able to
identify main ideas, you will also find it much easier to identify information that supports
them.

83

--- PAGE 83 ---
When students are asked to summarize the main point of a passage, however, they tend to
respond in one of two ways:

1) They state the topic
The Clovis People

2) They describe the content

Uh... so the guy, he basically talks about how these people, I think they were called
the Clovis people, right? They were like the first people who came across the Bering
Strait to America... Oh no, wait, they weren’t actually the first people to come across,
it’s just that they thought that those people were first. But so anyway those people
settled in New Mexico, I think it said like 13,000 years ago? Only now he’s saying
that there were other people who were actually there before the Clovis, and then he
says something about a mastodon rib and then something about radiocarbon dating
(I remember ‘cuz we learned about it in Chem this year). Oh yeah, and then he
mentions the New World.

Notice how long, not to mention how vague, this version is. It doesn’t really distinguish
between important and unimportant information - everything gets mushed in together, and
frankly it doesn’t make a lot of sense. This summary gives us exactly zero help in terms of
figuring out the main point. It also wastes colossal amounts of time.
This is not what you want to do.
Argument Summary:

New evidence shows the first inhabitants of the Americas were NOT Clovis people.
Notice how this version just hits the big idea and omits the details. All the details.
Argument Summary in super-condensed SAT terms:

New: CP # 1st/ Ams. |
Now notice how this version cuts out absolutely everything in order to focus on the absolute
essentials. It doesn’t even attempt to incorporate any sort of detail beyond the subject of the

passage (Clovis People) and the “so what?” (they weren't the first people in the Americas).

So in just four words and a number, we've captured the essential information without wasting
any time.

84

--- PAGE 84 ---
Lesbsuttnty a nommer¥ et eae" etn

Hg wee

:
é
i
t
:
§
;

nee

Stas

et RNAS MELARCH ps

5 loannidis, a professor of medicine at Stanford University,

i@ recently, “many published research findings are false

10

Point of a Paragraph

As mentioned earlier, the point of a paragraph is most likely to be located in two places: the
first (topic) sentence, whose purpose is to state the point, or the last sentence, which often -
but not always - serves to reiterate the point. While secondary points may be introduced in
between, the body of a paragraph typically provides details or evidence to support the point.

For example, consider the following paragraph, which follows this pattern:

Sometimes it seems surprising that science
functions at all. In 2005, medical science was shaken
by a paper with the provocative title “Why most
published research findings are false.” Written by John

it didn’t actually show that any particular result was
wrong. Instead, it showed that the statistics of reported
positive findings were not consistent with how often one
should expect to find them. As Ioannidis concluded more

or exaggerated, and an estimated 85 percent of
research resources are wasted.”

The first sentence serves to introduce the main point, and the last sentence serves to reinforce
it. The information in between expands on the original claim, explaining just what the author
means by the assertion Sontetinies it seents surprising that science functions at all.

Let’s look at another example:

Conservationists have historically been at odds
with the people who inhabit wildernesses. During the
last half of the 20th century, millions of indigenous
people were ousted from their homelands to establish
nature sanctuaries free of humans. Most succumbed to
malnutrition, disease and exploitation. Such outcomes —
coupled with the realization that indigenous groups
usually help to stabilize ecosystems by, for instance,
keeping fire at bay —have convinced major conservation
groups to take local human concerns into account. The
World Wildlife Fund (WWF) now describes indigenous
peoples as “natural allies,” and the Nature Conservancy
pledges to seek their “free, informed and prior” consent
to projects impacting their territories.

Here, again, the topic sentence tells us what the paragraph will be about: the conflict
between conservationists and the people who inhabit the lands those conservationist seek to
protect. In this case, however, the last sentence does not merely reiterate the topic but rather
moves it in a new direction, describing a possible solution to the conflict described in the

paragraph.

On the next page, we're going to look at a full-length passage.

85

--- PAGE 85 ---
10

415

20

25

30

35

40

45

This passage is adapted from from Kristin Sainani, “What,
Me Worry?” © 2014, Stanford Magazine.

According to a 2013 national survey by the
American Psychological Association, the average
stress level among adults is 5.1 on a scale of 10;
that’s one and a half points above what the
respondents judged to be healthy, Two-thirds of people
say managing stress is important, and nearly that
proportion had attempted to reduce their stress in the
previous five years. Yet only a little over a third say
they succeeded at doing so. More discouraging, teens
and young adults are experiencing higher levels of
stress, and also are struggling to manage it.

“Stress has a very bad reputation. It’s in pretty bad
shape, PR-wise,” acknowledges Firdaus Dhabhar, an
associate professor of psychiatry and behavioral science
at Stanford. “And justifiably so,” he adds.

Much of what we know about the physical and
mental toll of chronic stress stems from seminal work
by Robert Sapolsky beginning in the late 1970s.
Sapolsky, a neuroendocrinologist, was among the first
to make the connection that the hormones released
during the fight-or-flight response —the ones that
helped our ancestors avoid becoming dinner—have
deleterious effects when the stress is severe and
sustained. Especially insidious, chronic exposure to
one of these hormones, cortisol, causes brain changes
that make it increasingly difficult to shut the stress
response down.

But take heart: Recent research paints a different
portrait of stress, one in which it indeed has a positive
side. “There’s good stress, there’s tolerable stress,
and there’s toxic stress,” says Bruce McEwen of
Rockefeller University, an expert on stress and the
brain who trained both Sapolsky and Dhabhar.

Situations we typically perceive as stressful—a
confrontation with a co-worker, the pressure to
perform, a to-do list that’s too long—are not the toxic
type of stress that's been linked to serious health
issues such as cardiovascular disease, autoimmune
disorders, severe depression and cognitive impairment.
Short bouts of this sort of everyday stress can actually
be a good thing: Just think of the exhilaration of
the deadline met or the presentation crushed, the
triumph of holding it all together. And, perhaps not
surprisingly, it turns out that beating yourself up about
being stressed is counterproductive, as worrying about
the negative consequences can in itself exacerbate any
ill effects.

86

When Dhabhar was starting his graduate work in

McEwen's lab in the early 1990s, “the absolutely
50 overwhelming dogma was that stress suppresses
immunity.” But this didn't make sense to him from an
evolutionary perspective. If a lion is chasing you, he
reasoned, your immune system should be ramping up,
readying itself to heal torn flesh. It occurred to Dhabhar
that the effects of acute stress, which lasts minutes to
hours, might differ from the effects of chronic stress,
which lasts days to years,

Dhabhar likens the body’s immune cells to soldiers.
Because their levels in the blood plummet during acute
stress, “people used to say: ‘See, stress is bad for you;
your immune system's depressed,’” he says. “But most
immune battles are not going to be fought in the blood.”
He suspected that the immune cells were instead
traveling to the body’s “battlefields” —sites most likely
to be wounded in an attack, like the skin, gut and lungs.
In studies where rats were briefly confined (a short-term
stressor), he showed that after an initial surge of immune
cells into the bloodstream, they quickly exited the blood
and took up positions precisely where he predicted they
would.

“His work was a pioneering demonstration of how
important the difference is between acute and chronic
stress,” says Sapolsky, a professor of biology,
neurology, and neurological sciences and neurosurgery.
75 “Overwhelmingly, the bad health effects of stress are
those of chronic stress.”

This strategic deployment of immune cells can speed
wound healing, enhance vaccine effectiveness and
potentially fight cancer. In 2009, Dhabhar’s team
showed that knee surgery patients with robust immune
redistribution following the stress of surgery recovered
significantly faster and had better knee function a year
later than those with a more sluggish mobilization. In
other studies, volunteers who exercised or took a math
85 test (both acute stressors) immediately prior to being

vaccinated had a heightened antibody response relative

to volunteers who sat quietly. And in 2010, the
researchers curbed the development of skin cancer in

UV-exposed mice by stressing them before their
90 sunlamp sessions. Dhabhar speculates that giving

cancer patients low-dose injections of stress

hormones might help prime their immune systems to

fight the cancer. “It may not work out, but if it did,

the benefits could be tremendous,” he says.

55

60

65

70

80

Reitteration of

Main Point

--- PAGE 86 ---
§
$
3
§
¢
z
i

ee oe one eee ee

inet OM paves

PHENO LN et BANOO NAS Ita Rae Tet HNN IN Meelis ON Sb

See

sachet

;
2
&
4
s
4

What is the author’s main point about stress?

A)

B)
C)
D)

Although the author states the main point very clearly, you could simplify it further by
writing something like “AS = GOOD!” (“acute stress is good”). Or, if you wanted to give
more detail: “CS = bad, AS = good” (“chronic stress is bad, acute stress is good).

That information would come in handy if you encountered the following question:

It is more pervasive today than it was in
earlier periods.

It can sometimes have beneficial effects.
It has been linked to a variety of ailments.

It can have a detrimental impact on personal
relationships.

Acute stress GOOD = beneficial effects. All the correct answer does is take the very simple
language of our main point and rephrase it ina moderately more sophisticated way.

So although you may have some difficulty “translating” the specific wording of the passage
into the more abstract phrasing of the answer choices, your task will be far more difficult if
you're not sure what idea you're looking for in the first place.

If, on the other hand, you simply understand the passage as a mass of details, you'll be much
more likely to opt for an answer that mentions a word or phrase you remember from the
passage but that doesn’t actually capture the big picture.

Old Idea vs. New Idea

The “old idea” vs. “new idea” template is one of the most important concepts necessary for
making sense out of SAT social science and science passages. It can essentially be summed
up as “people used to believe x, but now they believe y.” Authors using this model typically
devote the first paragraph or two to discussing a traditionally accepted idea or theory, then
shift to explaining why that theory is wrong and why a new theory - the theory that
scientists or other researchers now believe ~ is actually correct.

Although authors will sometimes state flat-out that a particular idea is wrong, in other cases
they will be less direct. They'll imply skepticism by putting particular words or phrases in
quotation marks, or ask rhetorical questions such as but is this really the case? When the shift
to the “new idea” occurs, you must pay close attention to that place because the result or
theory discussed will almost certainly be the point of the passage. In some cases, opposing
arguments or potential objections to the theory (counterarguments) will be discussed later in
the passage, but in general, authors tend to stick to discussing “new ideas” once they've
transitioned to them.

87

--- PAGE 87 ---
The following list provides some common phrases that signal when authors are discussing
old vs. new ideas:

Old idea

* Some/Many/ Most people (scientists, researchers) believe...
* Itis commonly thought that...

* Accepted/conventional wisdom holds that...

* In the past/ For decades/ Traditionally it was believed that...

New Idea

* However, But in fact, In reality...

° But is it really true/the case that...?

* Itnow seems (clear)/ Researchers now think that...
* Recently, it has been found that...

¢ New research/evidence shows/suggests that...

¢ Another possibility is that...

As you read, it’s up to you to keep track of what the old vs. new ideas are, and why they are
false vs. true. Don’t rely on your memory: underline the information in the passage and
mark it with a huge arrow or star, or summarize it yourself. You may remember things up
to a point, but if you don’t make the key ideas clear for yourself, sooner or later you’ re likely
to get confused and choose an answer that’s exactly the opposite of the correct one.

Using the “Old Idea” to Predict Main Point and Attitude

One of the reasons that it is so crucial you be able to recognize the types of the phrases that
signal “old ideas” is that those phrases often allow you to identify the point of the passage
before the author even states it.

Think of it this way: if the introduction of a passage includes a sentence with the words
Many people think..., that’s an absolute giveaway that the idea that follows has been
discredited (or at least strongly called into question), and that the scientists discussed in the
passage will have a negative attitude toward that idea. Moreover, you can infer that the
“new idea” - the one toward which scientists in the passage have a positive attitude - will be
roughly the opposite. So from one sentence, it is possible to predict the main point AND the
likely attitude in various parts of the passage.

Note: In earlier versions of The Crifical Reader, I presented this framework in terms of the “They Say/I Say”
model developed by Gerald Graff and Cathy Birkenstein in their book of the same name. I have chosen to
eliminate that discussion in this edition because the passages used on the redesigned SAT are more
straightforward and less nuanced, and thus less aligned with the type of reading Graff and Birkenstein
discuss, I do, however, still strongly recommend their book as a superb aid for the transition to college-level
reading and writing.

88

--- PAGE 88 ---
g
i
a
4
2

Sega NR EN

2 RATS

shihowae.

Datta cegsiassiniseSORUS

;
;
H
\

SS sgeanisoni

You should always keep reading just to make sure, but once you've confirmed that the
author does in fact hold the view that the introduction suggests, you can often skim through
much of the body of the passage. For example, consider a passage that begins this way:

Some scientists conclude that music’s influence may
be a chance event, arising from its ability to hijack brain
systems built for other purposes such as language, emotion
and movement.

The phrase sonie scientists conclude is the equivalent of a flashing red signal indicating that the
researchers discussed in the passage disagree with the idea that music’s influence is a
“chance event.” We can very reasonably assume that these researchers believe music’s
influence is not a chance event, and that the remainder of the passage will explain why that
is the case.

Some passages will also present the “old idea” a bit more subtly. For example:

The Amazon Kindle—a “new and improved” version
of which has just been released—comes on like a technology
for our times: crisp, affordable, hugely capacious, capable of
connecting to the Internet, and green. How could one argue
5 with any of that? Or with the idea that it will make the reading
of texts once again seductive, using the same technology that
has drawn people away from the page back to it.

Although this example is somewhat subtler than the previous, there are a couple of clues.
First, the quotation marks in the first line imply skepticism (not everyone believes that the
Kindle is actually new and improved). Second, the rhetorical question How could one argue
with any of that? in lines 4-5 implies that author’s answer is, Well actually, some people can argue
with that - and I'm going to tell you what they say.

As a general rule, the presence of a contradictor such as however or but signals the transition
from the old to the new idea. This shift typically occurs somewhere in the first or second
paragraph, and usually no later than the beginning of the third paragraph. Whenever one of
those words appears, you need to pay special attention to it. Not only will it provide
important information about how the passage is structured, but it will also tell you where in
the passage to focus because the main idea will typically be stated after that transition.

Look at the passage on the next page: it’s a classic example of this kind of structure. We've
looked at it before, but now we're going to look at it in a slightly different way.

If you simply scan the passage without really reading it, you should be able to spot the word
but in line 11. That single word suggests that everything before it will have something to do
with the old model (wrong), and that everything after it will have something to do with the
new model (right). Sure enough, that’s exactly how the passage works. Key phrases are
underlined.

89

--- PAGE 89 ---
Sometime near the end of the Pleistocene, a band ~_ |
of people left northeastern Asia, crossed the Bering ie

land bridge when the sea level was low, entered
Alaska and became the first Americans. Since the
5 1930s, archaeologists have thought these people were

members of the Clovis culture. First discovered in
New Mexico in the 1930s, the Clovis culture is known
for its distinct stone tools, primarily fluted projectile
points. For decades, Clovis artifacts were the oldest

10 known in the New World, dating to 13,000 years ago.
But in recent years, researchers have found more
and more evidence that people were living in North
and South America before the Clovis.

The most recently confirmed evidence comes from

15 Washington. During a dig conducted from 1977 to
1979, researchers uncovered a bone projectile point
stuck in a mastodon rib. Since then, the age of the
find has been debated, but recently anthropologist
Michael Waters and his colleagues announced a new

20 radiocarbon date for the rib: 13,800 years ago,
making it 800 years older than the oldest Clovis a
artifact. Other pre-Clovis evidence comes from a-~
variety of locations across the New World. oo

The reference to the bone projectile point (line 16)
serves primarily to

A)
B)
C)

D)

~ ce

\

\

/

Ya

tn rt

In order to avoid confusion, jot down for yourself the “old idea” and the “new idea.” And by
“jot down,” I mean scribble in shorthand ~ you don’t get points for neatness, and it should
take you a few seconds at most.

O=CP 1st NA (Clovis people first in North America)
N = Ppl in NA pre-CP (People were in North America before Clovis)

If you are concerned that writing these things down will take too much time, just label them
in the passage as is done above. But either way, you must remember to look back at your
notes! I’ve witnessed many students underline the sentence where an answer was located
but still get the question wrong because they forgot to look back at what they’d written.

Now let's look at a question:

provide support for the claim that the Americas
were inhabited before the Clovis arrived.
describe a tool used by prehistoric people in the
Americas.

suggest that the Clovis people arrived in the
Americas earlier than previously thought.
emphasize the difficulty of life during the
Pleistocene era,

90

--- PAGE 90 ---
We OR regen

SATIS at AE NEAegeNF yg PONE M

f
i

i
&
5
a

=
:
#
$f
$
FE
‘

What's the author's point (i.e., claim)? That the Clovis People were NOT the first people to
inhabit the Americas (OR: there were people in the Americas BEFORE the Clovis People).

We learn later in the passage the projectile point was dated at 13,800 years old but that the
Clovis People arrived only 13,000 years ago. The author is therefore mentioning the
projectile point as evidence that people inhabited the Americas before 13,000 years ago, i.e.,
before the Clovis People arrived. So the answer is A).

If you didn’t have the main point straight, you could easily pick C), which is just a little bit
off. It’s not that the Clovis themselves arrived earlier than previously thought ~ it’s that
another group arrived before the Clovis.

Notice that the details of the line in question are borderline irrelevant: it doesn’t matter if
you know anything about projectile points and mastodons, All that counts is your ability to
understand the importance of those details in context of the larger argument. If you
understand the argument, you can see how the details fit; if you miss the argument, you'll
have to start all over again with each new question.

In the passage on the following page, references to the “old idea” (conventional marketing
wisdom) are underlined, and references to the “new idea” (what the author and his
colleagues think) are in bold.

Notice that the author jumps back and forth between discussing these two viewpoints, using
the transition but to signal that he is shifting from old to new. In longer passages, this type of
switching is not unheard of. In such cases, you must read carefully in order to make sure you
do not confuse the two.

91

--- PAGE 91 ---
wn

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

This passage is adapted from Barry Schwartz, “More
Isn’t Always Better,” © 2006 by Harvard Business Review.

Marketers assume that the more choices they offer,
the more likely customers will be able to find just the
tight thing. They assume, for instance, that offering 50
styles of jeans instead of two increases the chances that
shoppers will find a pair they really like. Nevertheless,
research now shows that there can be too much choice;
when there is, consumers are less likely to buy
anything at all, and if they do buy, they are less
satisfied with their selection.

It all began with jam. In 2000, psychologists Sheena
lyengar and Mark Lepper published a remarkable study.
On one day, shoppers at an upscale food market saw a
display table with 24 varieties of gourmet jam. Those
who sampled the spreads received a coupon for $1 off
any jam. On another day, shoppers saw a similar table,
except that only six varieties of the jam were on display,
The large display attracted more interest than the small
one. But when the time came to purchase, people who
saw the large display were one-tenth as likely to buy as
people who saw the small display.

Other studies have confirmed this result that more
choice is not always better. As the variety of snacks,
soft drinks, and beers offered at convenience stores
increases, for instance, sales volume and customer
satisfaction decrease. Moreover, as the number of
retirement investment options available to employees
increases, the chance that they will choose any
decreases. These studies and others have shown not
only that excessive choice can produce “choice
paralysis,” but also that it can reduce people’s
satisfaction with their decisions, even if they made
good ones. My colleagues and I have found that
increased choice decreases satisfaction with matters as
trivial as ice cream flavors and as significant as jobs.

These results challenge what we think we know
about human nature and the determinants of well-being.
Both psychology and business have operated on the
assumption that the relationship between choice and

well-being is straightforward: The more choices people
have, the better off they are. In psychology, the benefits
of choice have been tied to autonomy and control. In

business, the benefits of choice have been tied to the
benefits of free markets more generally. Added options
make no one worse off, and they are bound to make
someone better off.

Choice is good for us, but its relationship to
satisfaction appears to be more complicated than we
had assumed. There is diminishing marginal utility in
having alternatives; each new option subtracts a little

92

50 from the feeling of well-being, until the marginal
benefits of added choice level off. What’s more,
psychologists and business academics alike have
largely ignored another outcome of choice: More of it
requires increased time and effort and can lead to

55 anxiety, regret, excessively high expectations, and
self-blame if the choices don’t work out. When the
number of available options is small, these costs
are negligible, but the costs grow with the number of
options. Eventually, each new option makes us feel

60 worse off than we did before.

Without a doubt, having more options enables us,
most of the time, to achieve better objective outcomes.

Again, having 50 styles of jeans as opposed to two

increases the likelihood that customers will find a pair
65 that fits. But the subjective outcome may be that

shoppers will feel overwhelmed and dissatisfied. This

dissociation between objective and subjective results

creates a significant challenge for retailers and

marketers that look to choice as a way to enhance the
70 perceived value of their goods and services.

Choice can no longer be used to justify a marketing
strategy in and of itself. More isn’t always better,
either for the customer or for the retailer.
Discovering how much assortment is warranted is a

75 considerable empirical challenge. But companies that
get the balance right will be amply rewarded.

--- PAGE 92 ---
Ss OANA ce EDTA NAN MAS

fg
+4
4
i
i
i
z
5
£
;
Z
i

tne ner a

Fiction Passages: What if the Main Point Isn’t Obvious?

Because fiction passages are not based on arguments but instead revolve around characters’
actions/reactions and relationships, their “main points” can be more challenging.
Furthermore, most passages are altered to fit into 85 or so lines, and the edits can sometimes
be awkward. Add that to the lack of context, and it’s no wonder that figuring out just what is
happening can be a challenge.

Regardless of how faithful they are to the original, however, fiction passages typically focus
on a specific situation, character trait, or relationship. You can also think of the point as an
extremely condensed (4-6 word) summary of the passage - it answers the question “what is
this passage about?” In fact, most fiction passages will be accompanied by a summary
question, so if you've already summarized the passage for yourself, you'll have far less work
to do and may be able to jump to the answer immediately.

As is true for all other types of passages, you should pay careful attention to major
transitions, unusual punctuation, and strong language because they will virtually always
appear at key places in the passage.

You should also pay particular attention to the places where important information is likely
to appear: the introduction will present the character(s) and the general scenario, and the
conclusion will reiterate the essential information that the author wants to convey about
them.

If you are a very strong reader who is capable of getting the gist of a passage from a limited
number of places, you may be able to skim through larger sections the same way you would
in a natural or social science passage.

That said, fiction passages are often structured more unpredictably than non-fiction
passages, and you may need to read larger sections of fiction passages more closely, trying
to get a sense of who’s involved and what they want (or don’t want) while being careful not
to waste too much time on unfamiliar or confusing language.

In addition, you should be careful to consider only the information provided by the author
and not attempt to speculate about any larger meaning. What counts is your ability to
understand the literal events of the passage and how they are conveyed by specific words
and phrases, That's it. If you do go looking for some larger symbolism or start to make
assumptions not explicitly supported by the passage, you can easily lose sight of the basics.
In fact, most people have problems with passages like these not because there’s a profound
interpretation that can only be perceived through some mystical process, but rather because
they aren’t sufficiently literal.

On the next page, we’re going to look at an example. The passage is divided into two
sections. As you read, think about why the division occurs where it does,

93

--- PAGE 93 ---
The following passage is adapted from the novel
Summer by Edith Wharton, originally published in 1917,

The hours of the Hatchard Memorial librarian were
from three to five; and Charity Royall's sense of duty
usually kept her at her desk until nearly half-past four.
But she had never perceived that any practical

5 advantage thereby accrued either to North Dormer or to
herself; and she had no scruple in decreeing, when it
suited her, that the library should close an hour earlier.
A few minutes after Mr. Harney’s departure she formed
this decision, put away her lace, fastened the shutters,

10 and turned the key in the door of the temple of
knowledge. The street upon which she emerged was
still empty: and after glancing up and down it she began
to walk toward her house. But instead of entering she
passed on, turned into a field-path and mounted to a

15 pasture on the hillside.

She let down the bars of the gate, followed a trail
along the crumbling wall of the pasture, and walked on
till she reached a knol] where a clump of larches shook
out their fresh tassels to the wind. There she lay down

20 on the slope, tossed off her hat and hid her face in the
grass. She was blind and insensible to many things, and
dimly knew it; but to all that was light and air, perfume
and color, every drop of blood in her responded. She
loved the roughness of the dry mountain grass under

25 her palms, the smell of the thyme into which she crushed
her face, the fingering of the wind in her hair and
through her cotton blouse, and the creak of the larches
as they swayed to it,

She often climbed up the hill and lay there alone for

30 the mere pleasure of feeling the wind and of rubbing her
cheeks in the grass. Generally at such times she did not
think of anything, but lay immersed in an inarticulate
well-being. Today the sense of well-being was
intensified by her joy at escaping from the library. She

35 liked well enough to have a friend drop in and talk to
her when she was on duty, but she hated to be bothered
about books. How could she remember where they
were, when they were so seldom asked for? Orma Fry
occasionally took out a novel, and her brother Ben was

40 fond of what he called “jography,” and of books
relating to trade and bookkeeping; but no one else asked
for anything except, at intervals, “Uncle Tom’s Cabin,”
or “Opening of a Chestnut Burr,” or Longfellow. She
had these under her hand, and could have found them

45 in the dark; but unexpected demands came so rarely
that they exasperated her like an injustice...

She had liked the young man’s looks, and his short-

sighted eyes, and his odd way of speaking, that was abrupt

yet soft, just as his hands were sun-burnt and sinewy, yet

94

50 with smooth nails like a woman’s. His hair was
sunburnt-looking too, or rather the colour of bracken
after frost; eyes grey, with the appealing look of the
shortsighted, his smile shy yet confident, as if he knew
lots of things she had never dreamed of, and yet

55 wouldn’t for the world have had her fee! his superiority.
But she did feel it, and liked the feeling; for it was new
to her. Poor and ignorant as she was, and knew herself
to be—humblest of the humble even in North Dormer,
where to come from the Mountain was the worst

60 disgrace —yet in her narrow world she had always ruled.
It was partly, of course, owing to the fact that lawyer
Royall was “the biggest man in North Dormer”; so
much too big for it, in fact, that outsiders, who didn’t
know, always wondered how it held him. In spite of

65 everything—and in spite even of Miss Hatchard—
lawyer Royall ruled in North Dormer; and Charity ruled
in lawyer Royall’s house. She had never put it to herself
in those terms; but she knew her power. Confusedly,
the young man in the library had made her feel for

70 the first time what might be the sweetness of
dependence. She sat up and looked down on the house
where she held sway.

--- PAGE 94 ---
Hebe GWA MOM Non

ONT Crane een ee eri

STAAL RN RS OHNE AR

i
|
&
£
§

ggatO ND SAG ZARB AGEL ay AED

nieces APPT go

alee ae

If you’re not sure how to determine the “point” of a fiction passage like this, don’t worry.
We're going to break it down.

Even if fiction passages do not contain arguments, they can often be divided into sections -
usually no more than two or three. This passage can be divided into two basic parts:

1) Lines 1-46

In the first section, we are introduced to Charity Royall, the character on whom the
passage focuses. We learn that she works as a librarian, that she dislikes her job, and
that she’s eager to escape from it. If we had to sum it up in a few words, we might
say “Charity hates job.” (If you're inclined to doodle, you could also write something
like “Charity © job.”) This section contains a Jot of description, so if you get the gist
after a while, you can just skip down,

2) Lines 47-end

Sections change when new information is introduced or a shift in topic occurs. The
introduction of a new character (the man) in line 47 indicates that a new section is
beginning. This is where things start to get interesting. We learn that Charity is
intrigued by the man and by the prospect of a different life that he represents, but we
also learn that she “rules” in her house.

Taking both parts of the passage together, we thus have the central conflict: Charity is torn
between her current life, part of which is unpleasant (she hates her job) and part of which is
pleasant (she rules at home), and, the passage implies, the possibility of another life as the
young man’s wife. The first part of the passage thus serves to set up the second part - it
explains why Charity would want her life to change.

The really, important part of the passage comes at the end. That’s hardly a surprise because
most writing, even fiction, is usually structured so that the most important idea comes
last. What do we learn there? That Charity is confused. So a main point, we could put down
something like: “Charity torn old/new life.”

Note that this statement does not even try to cover all of the events. It simply states the main
conflict the story is there to convey. It does not “interpret” anything - it simply condenses
the information that is directly stated by the author. If we wanted to incorporate both parts
of the passage into a main point, however, we could say:

C hates job BUT power at home, meets man -> questions life

So to sum up: if you find yourself confused, focus on the conclusion, particularly the last
few sentences. Don’t waste time trying to figure out the relationship between the various
parts of the passage if you're not sure upfront. If you understand the point of the conclusion,
chances are that will be the point of the beginning as well. You can then use that information
to answer various big-picture questions.

95

--- PAGE 95 ---
Which choice best summarizes the first two
paragraphs of the passage (lines 1-28)?

A)
B)

C)

D)

Which choice provides the most accurate summary
of this passage?

A)
B)
C)

D)

A woman who dislikes her job seeks solace
in nature,

A woman works hard at her job but is
persuaded to leave by a customer.

A woman feels overwhelmed by the demands
of her job and desires solitude in a library.

A woman spends a day in the wilderness to
avoid an unpleasant task.

A character is forced to make a momentous
decision after an unexpected meeting.

A character feels uncertain about her life
following a significant encounter,

A character holds great power at work

but feels powerless in her own home.

A character works hard at her job but is
persuaded to leave it by a man she meets.

Question #1:

The easiest way to answer this question is to use the main point. If you've written that
Charity hates her job, you can start by making an educated guess that A) is likely to be
correct. And in fact, A) describes precisely what happens in the first two paragraphs: Charity
dislikes her job and leaves it early one day to go sit on a grassy hill (=nature) and make
herself feel better (=seek solace).

If you haven't written the point, focus on the beginning of the first paragraph and the end of
the second, The first paragraph begins by describing Charity’s decision to leave work, and
the second paragraph ends with her lying on a grassy hill. That sequence corresponds to A).

Question #2:

If you’ve written the main point, you’ve already gone most of the way toward the answer.
Basically, Charity is all torn up over the fact that she met this guy (=a significant encounter)
and now can’t figure out what she wants (=feels uncertain). So the answer is B).

Be careful with A). Charity is thrown into confusion by her meeting with the young man, but
she isn’t actually forced to make a “momentous decision.” C) reverses the situation in the
passage: Charity is powerless at work, not at home. And D) is wrong because no one
persuades Charity to leave work.

96

--- PAGE 96 ---
i

Which choice best describes the sequence of
events described in this passage?

A)

B)

C)

D)

Order of Events

You may also encounter questions that ask you to determine the sequence in which events
discussed in a passage took place. Although having a solid big-picture understanding of the
passage can help, that knowledge alone will not necessarily get you all the way to the
answer,

The reason is that these questions are more likely to accompany passages that jump around
in time - that is, passages that discuss events in an order different from the one in which
they actually occurred. This is normally accomplished through the use of flashback, a
technique in which an author describes an event or situation that occurred before the main
action of the story.

For example, in the passage we've been looking at, the scene between Charity and the young
man is introduced halfway through the passage; however, the event itself took place before
the action of the passage itself, and Charity is simply remembering it during the passage.

Understanding that timeline would become very important if you encountered a question
like this:

A woman dislikes her job and seeks solace
in nature, where she reflects on a memorable
encounter,

A woman works hard at her job but is
persuaded to leave; she then returns home,
where she interacts with another character.
A woman feels overwhelmed by the demands
of her job and encounters a man with whom
she spends the afternoon.

A woman has a significant encounter while
at work, then leaves because she feels too
conflicted to continue.

The most important thing to understand about a question like this is that it is not asking
about the order in which events are discussed in the passage, but rather about the order in
which the events actually took place.

If you're not clear about the fact that Charity’s encounter with the man does not occur
during the action of the passage, you might be tempted to choose either C) or D). A) is,
however, the only answer that indicates that the encounter occurred before the time of the
passage, so it is correct.

97

--- PAGE 97 ---
10

45

20

25

Supporting Examples: Working Backwards

Some questions will test your understanding of main points less directly. In fact, they will
not explicitly ask about the main point at all. Rather, they'll test it “backwards,” citing an
example or list of examples and asking you to identify what point those items are used to
support.

The correct answer will therefore restate either the point of a particular section or the point
of the passage as a whole. Because main points typically come before supporting examples,
you should back up and read from at least a sentence before the line reference. If you start

at the line reference and keep going, you are likely to miss key information.

Let’s look at an example:

Yogi Berra, the former Major League baseball
catcher and coach, once remarked that you can’t hit
and think at the same time. Of course, since he also
reportedly said, “I really didn’t say everything I said,”
it is not clear we should take his statements at face
value. Nonetheless, a widespread view — in both
academic journals and the popular press — is that
thinking about what you are doing, as you are doing it,
interferes with performance. The idea is that once you
have developed the ability to play an arpeggio on the
piano, putt a golf ball or parallel park, attention to what
you are doing leads to inaccuracies, blunders and
sometimes even utter paralysis. As the great
choreographer George Balanchine would say to his
dancers, “Don’t think, dear; just do.”

Perhaps you have experienced this destructive force
yourself, Start thinking about just how to carry a full
glass of water without spilling, and you'll end up
drenched. How, exactly, do you initiate a telephone
conversation? Begin wondering, and before long, the
recipient of your call will notice the heavy breathing
and hang up. Our actions, the French philosopher
Maurice Merleau-Ponty tells us, exhibit a “magical”
efficacy, but when we focus on them, they degenerate
into the absurd. A 13-time winner on the Professional
Golfers Association Tour, Dave Hiil, put it like this:
“You can’t be thinking about the mechanics of the sport
while you are performing.”

The author mentions the “ability to play an
arpeggio on the piano, putt a golf ball, or parallel
park” (lines 10-12) as examples of actions that

A) require significant practice to master,

B) are best performed without conscious
consideration.

C) can result in serious physical harm.

D) interfere with performance of more important
tasks,

We're going to start with the sentence before the list - we know that it’s important because it
includes a set of dashes (“interesting” punctuation). What do we learn from that sentence?
That according to a common viewpoint, thinking about what you are doing, as you are doing it,
interferes with performance.

The examples that follow serve as examples of actions that become more difficult when they

are performed with too much thought. In other words, they are actions that are performed
better when undertaken “without conscious consideration,” B) is thus correct.

98

--- PAGE 98 ---
mista trai ERNE RR NI

Haatespeonndtnaie geet hI

:
53
=
2
‘
5
y
Fi
i

|
3
fy
3
:
if
?
3
2

ANA Re tg PENI BONY Y gi 7b tin ef. ORAM Naor PRIN!

Let's look at another example:

The following passage is adapted from Susan B.
Anthony’s Remarks to the Woman’s Auxiliary
Congress of the Public Press Congress, May 23, 1893.

The author uses the phrase “rhetorical flourishes’
(line 12) as an example of

Mrs. President and Sisters, [ might almost say
daughters —] cannot tell you how much joy has filled
my heart as I have sat here listening to these papers
and noting those characteristics that made each in its

5 own way beautiful and masterful. ] would in no ways
lessen the importance of these expressions by your
various representatives, but I want to say that the words
that specially voiced what I may call the up-gusb of my
soul were to be found in the paper read by Mrs. Swalm

10 on “The Newspaper as a Factor of Civilization.” I have
never been a pen artist and I have never succeeded with
rhetorical flourishes unless it were by accident. But I
have always admired supremely that which I could
realize the least. The woman who can coin words and

15 ideas to suit me best would not be unlike Mrs. Swalm,
and when I heard her I said: “That is worthy of
Elizabeth Cady Stanton.”

While I have been sitting here I have been thinking

that we have made strides in journalism in the last forty

20 years. | recall the first time I ever wrote for a paper.
The periodical was called the Lily, It was edited —and
quite appropriately —by a Mrs. Bloomer. The next
paper to which I contributed was the Una. These two
journals were the only avenues women had through

20 which to face themselves in type to any extent worthy
of note before the war. The press was as kind as it
knew how to be. It meant well and did all for us it knew
how to do. We couldn't ask it to do more than it knew
how. But that was little enough and I tried an experiment

25 editing a newspaper myself. I started a paper and ran it
for two years at a vast cost to every one concerned in it.
I served seven years at lecturing to pay off the debt and
interest on that paper and I considered myself fortunate
to get off as easily as that.

>

A) anaccomplishment admired in women.
B) an outdated form of communication.
C) askili at which she does not excel.

D) a task that she tried for many years to
master.

The question asks what the phrase rhetorical flourishes is an example of, so it’s telling us that
the phrase is being used to support a point. Our job is to figure out what that point is.

The question refers to line 12, but we're going read the entire sentence in which the key
phrase appears. The following sentence starts with an important transition, but, so we're
going to read it as well.

What do we learn from those sentences? That rhetorical flourishes are something Anthony
never succeeded at unless it were by accident. They're something she admires in other people,
but that she has never been able to “realize” (that is, to achieve - note the second meaning!).
In other words, she stinks at them, i.e., she does NOT excel. So the answer is C).

99

--- PAGE 99 ---
5 The list of ailments connected to stress is staggeringly

10

415

20

25

Main Point vs. Primary Purpose

Often, when students encounter questions asking about the primary purpose of a passage,
they reiterate the main point, then become confused when an answer corresponding to it
does not appear among the choices. Although the purpose and the point of the passage are
related, sometimes directly and sometimes in ways that are less obvious, they are not
precisely the same thing.

Main Point - The primary argument the author is making. It is usually stated more
or less directly in the passage, usually in the introduction and conclusion.

Primary Purpose - The rhetorical goal of the passage as a whole (e.g., explain,
entphasize, question). While the primary purpose is based on the overall passage, there
is often a key sentence that will point to a particular answer.

For example, consider the following passage:

Chronic stress, it turns out, is extremely dangerous.
While stress doesn’t cause any single disease — in fact,
the causal link between stress and ulcers has been largely
disproved — it makes most diseases significantly worse.

diverse and includes everything from the common cold
and lower-back pain to Alzheimer’s disease, major
depressive disorder, and heart attack, Stress hollows out
our bones and atrophies our muscles. It triggers adult-
onset diabetes and may also be connected to high blood
pressure. In fact, numerous studies of human longevity
in developed countries have found that psychosocial
factors such as stress are the single most important
variable in determining the length of a life. It’s not that
genes and risk factors like smoking don’t matter. It’s
that our levels of stress matter more.

Furthermore, the effects of chronic stress directly
counteract improvements in medical care and public
health, Antibiotics, for instance, are far less effective
when our immune system is suppressed by stress; that
fancy heart surgery will work only if the patient can
learn to shed stress. As pioneering stress researcher
Robert Sapolsky notes, “You can give a guy a drug-
coated stent, but if you don’t fix the stress problem, it
won’t really matter. For so many conditions, stress is
the major long-term risk factor. Everything else is a
short-term fix.”

The primary purpose of the passage is to

A) call attention to the harmful nature of a
condition and describe some of its effects.

B) describe the results of a study and explain
how its findings can be applied.

C) outline the history of an illness and point out
its consequences for modern society.

D) discuss the results of Robert Sapolsky’s
research and its reception by the scientific
community.

Main Point: Chronic stress = BAD. The very first sentence provides the point, and the rest of
the passage serves to illustrate it with specific examples of the damage chronic stress can
cause, That point corresponds exactly to A). We don’t even need to check the other answers.

Now let’s look back at the Wharton passage. We’ve already seen a question asking about the
main point, but this time we’re going to look at it in terms of ovetall purpose.

100

--- PAGE 100 ---
}
?
Hi
i
‘
f
:
2

5
&

RS ea Te

pein SPE Nga I OT get IIRE OS ERCS, B.

10

15

20

25

30

3

ies)

4

S

45

The following passage is adapted from the novel
Summer by Edith Wharton, initially published in 1917.

The hours of the Hatchard Memorial librarian were
from three to five; and Charity Royall's sense of duty
usually kept her at her desk unti! nearly half-past four.
But she had never perceived that any practical
advantage thereby accrued either to North Dormer or to
herself; and she had no scruple in decreeing, when it
suited her, that the library should close an hour earlier.
A few minutes after Mr. Harney’s departure she formed
this decision, put away her lace, fastened the shutters, i
and turned the key in the door of the temple of
knowledge. The street upon which she emerged was
still empty: and after glancing up and down it she began
to walk toward her house. But instead of entering she
passed on, turned into a field-path and mounted to a
pasture on the hiliside.

She let down the bars of the gate, followed a trail
along the crumbling wall of the pasture, and walked on
till she reached a knoll where a clump of larches shook
out their fresh tassels to the wind. There she lay down
on the slope, tossed off her hat and hid her face tn the
grass. She was blind and insensible to many things, and
dimly knew it; but to all that was light and air, perfume
and color, every drop of blood in her responded. She
loved the roughness of the dry mountain grass under
her palms, the smell of the thyme into which she crushed
her face, the fingering of the wind in her hair and
through her cotton blouse, and the creak of the larches
as they swayed to it,

She often climbed up the hi!! and lay there alone for
the mere pleasure of feeling the wind and of rubbing her
cheeks in the grass, Generally at such times she did not
think of anything, but lay immersed in an inarticulate
well-being. Today the sense of well-being was
intensified by her joy at escaping from the library. She i
liked well enough to have a friend drop in and talk to
her when she was on duty, but she hated to be bothered
about books. How could she remember where they
were, when they were so seldom asked for? Orma Fry
occasionally took out a novel, and her brother Ben was
fond of what he called “jography,” and of books
relating to trade and bookkeeping; but no one else asked |
for anything except, at intervals, “Uncle Tom's Cabin,”
or “Opening of a Chestnut Burr,” or Longfellow. She
had these under her hand, and could have found them
in the dark; but unexpected demands came so rarely
that they exasperated her like an injustice... i

She had liked the young man’s looks, and his short- |
sighted eyes, and his odd way of speaking, that was abrupt |
yet soft, just as his hands were sun-burnt and sinewy,

101

50 with smooth nails like a woman’s. His hair was
sunburnt-looking too, or rather the colour of bracken
after frost; eyes grey, with the appealing look of the
shortsighted, his smile shy yet confident, as if he knew
lots of things she had never dreamed of, and yet

55 wouldn’t for the world have had her feel his superiority.
But she did feel it, and liked the feeling; for it was new
to her. Poor and ignorant as she was, and knew herself
to be—humblest of the humble even in North Dormer,
where to come from the Mountain was the worst

60 disgrace —yet in her narrow world she had always ruled.
It was partly, of course, owing to the fact that lawyer
Royal! was “the biggest man in North Dormer”; so
much too big for it, in fact, that outsiders, who didn’t
know, always wondered how it held him. In spite of

65 everything—and in spite even of Miss Hatchard —
lawyer Royall ruled in North Dormer; and Charity ruled
in lawyer Royall’s house. She had never put it to herself
in those terms; but she knew her power, Confusedly,
the young man in the library had made her feel for

70 the first time what might be the sweetness of
dependence. She sat up and looked down on the
house where she held sway.

me

The primary purpose of the passage is to

A) illustrate a family’s daily life in a small town.

B) describe how a significant encounter causes
a character to reevaluate her life.

C) call attention to the difference between a
character’s public and private behavior.

D) explain the influence of books on a main
character’s daily life.

--- PAGE 101 ---
If you encounter a “purpose of a passage” question right after you've finished reading the
passage, your immediate thought might be, “Oh no, I was so focused on trying to get what
was going on in the passage that I wasn’t really thinking about the purpose. You mean now I
have to go back and reread the whole thing so that I can figure it out?” Either that, or you
might be inclined to leave that question for last, working through the detail-based questions
first and using them to figure out the big picture.

Leaving a big-picture question for the end is certainly a fair strategy if you find it helpful
(rereading an entire passage for the sake of a single question is a very bad idea), but if you
get a good sense of the passage the first time you read it, you should be able to handle these
questions upfront.

Even though this question asks about the purpose rather than the point, we need to start by
reiterating the “ point:”

C hates job BUT power at home, meets man — questions life (Charity hates her job even
though she’s powerful at home, but then she meets a guy and starts to question what she
really wants.)

Or: C unhappy but unsure/change
Or: What does C want?

Or even just: C = confused

As discussed earlier, the most important part of the passage is the end of the conclusion, and
it gives us pretty much all the information we need.

The correct answer is basically going to tell us that the purpose of the passage is to describe
this girl who meets a guy and realizes that she doesn’t know what the heck she wants. That's
pretty much what B) says. It just phrases it from a slightly different angle and with more
general wording. Charity’s meeting with the man is “a significant encounter.” We know it’s
significant because it causes her to start wondering what she really wants.

Otherwise, A) is wrong because the passage focuses on a single character, not a family; C) is
wrong because the passage doesn’t really tell us much about Charity’s behavior at all - the
focus is on her thoughts and feelings. Her interactions with other characters are mentioned,
and she’s certainly alone for a good portion of the passage, but Wharton does not go out of
her way to call the reader’s attention to any difference in how she acts in those two
situations. D) is just plain wrong - the passage makes it clear that Charity can’t stand her job
at the library. There’s also nothing to suggest that books themselves have influenced her
daily life (for good or bad), only that she dislikes working with them.

102

--- PAGE 102 ---
CEASE NCC ONSEN

Sa Saha BSG

sainaantAiy yaiese eae Rste oS AREE IN A ASE IAS

4
§
\
E
fd
Fi
x
‘
g
i
z
4

 Arenpemmay amare tora ORR LEENA Ay NM EB MRC Ni gi OAS AOI COIN BI OLN Set Ne SF WE ERY ONS le LI SWIORS NGS VEL CLAN EER ity ESTER NI

1.

10

45

20

25

30

35

40

45

The Big Picture Exercises

To understand what the new software—that is,
analytics—can do that’s different from more familiar
software like spreadsheets, word processing, and
graphics, consider the lowly photograph. Here the
relevant facts aren’t how many bytes constitute a digital
photograph, or a billion of them. That’s about as
instructive as counting the silver halide molecules used
to form a single old-fashioned print photo. The important
feature of a digital image’s bytes is that, unlike
crystalline molecules, they are uniquely easy to store,
transport, and manipulate with software. In the first era
of digital images, people were fascinated by the
convenience and malleability (think PhotoShop) of
capturing, storing, and sharing pictures. Now, instead of
using software to manage photos, we can mine features
of the bytes that make up the digital image. Facebook
can, without privacy invasion, track where and when,
for example, vacationing is trending, since digital images
reveal at least that much. But more importantly, those
data can be cross-correlated, even in real time, with
seemingly unrelated data such as local weather, interest
rates, crime figures, and so on. Such correlations
associated with just one photograph aren’t revealing.
But imagine looking at billions of photos over weeks,
months, years, then correlating them with dozens of
directly related data sets (vacation bookings, air traffic),
tangential information (weather, interest rates,
unemployment), or orthogonal information (social or
political trends), With essentially free super-computing,
we can mine and usefully associate massive, formerly
unrelated data sets and unveil all manner of economic,
cultural, and social realities.

For science fiction aficionados, Isaac Asimov
anticipated the idea of using massive data sets to predict
human behavior, coining it “psychohistory” in his 1951
Foundation trilogy. The bigger the data set, Asimov said
then, the more predictable the future. With big-data
analytics, one can finally see the forest, instead of just
the capillaries in the tree leaves. Or to put it in more
accurate terms, one can see beyond the apparently
random motion of a few thousand molecules of air inside
a balloon; one can see the balloon itself, and beyond that,
that it is inflating, that it is yellow, and that it is part of a
bunch of balloons en route to a birthday party. The
data/software world has, until now, been largely about
looking at the molecules inside one balloon.

103

ae

The main idea of the passage is that

A) Bytes have allowed people to capture and
edit images in innovative ways.

B) New forms of technology allow users’
activities to be tracked without violating
privacy.

C) Recent developments in technology have
transformed the way data is acquired and
analyzed.

D) Modern technology was described in science
fiction novels long before it was invented.

The author’s central claim in the second
paragraph is that

A) The predictions of science fiction writers
tend to be more accurate than those of
scientists.

B) Ali human behavior can be understood
through the use of massive data sets.

C) Technological innovation is often inspired by
the natural world.

D) Data sets will reveal unforeseen relationships
between large-scale phenomena.

--- PAGE 103 ---
Zz.

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

This passage is adapted from Jamaica Kincaid,
Annie John, © 1985 Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
The protagonist is a girl growing up in the Caribbean.

It was the first day of a new term, Miss Nelson
said, so we would not be attending to any of our usual
subjects; instead, we were to spend the morning in
contemplation and reflection and writing something she
described as an “autobiographical essay.” In the
afternoon, we would read aloud to each other our
auto-biographical essays. (I knew quite well about
“autobiography” and “essay,” but reflection and
contemplation! A day at school spent in such a way!
Of course, in most books all the good people were
always contemplating and reflecting before they did
anything. Perhaps in her mind’s eye she could see our
future and, against all prediction, we tured out to be
good people.) On hearing this, a huge sigh went up
from the girls.

Half the sighs were in happiness at the thought of
sitting and gazing off into clear space, the other half in
unhappiness at the misdeeds that would have to go
unaccomplished. I joined the happy half, because I
knew it would please Miss Nelson, and, my own
selfish interest aside, I liked so much the way she wore
her troned hair and her long-sleeved blouse and box-
pleated skirt that I wanted to please her.

The morning was uneventful enough: a girl
spilled ink from her inkwell all over her uniform; a
girl broke her pen nib and then made a big to-do about
replacing it; girls twisted and turned in their seats and
pinched each other’s bottoms; girls passed notes to
each other. All this Miss Nelson must have seen and
heard, but she didn’t say anything—only kept reading
her book: an elaborately illustrated edition of The
Tempest, as later, passing by her desk, I saw. Midway
in the morning, we were told to go out and stretch
our legs and breathe some fresh air for a few minutes;
when we returned, we were given glasses of cold
lemonade and a slice of bun to refresh us.

As soon as the sun stood in the middle of the sky,
we were sent home for lunch. The earth may have
grown an inch or two larger between the time I had
walked to school that morning and the time I went
home to lunch, for some girls made a small space for
me in their little band. But I couldn’t pay much attention
to them; my mind was on my new surroundings, my
new teacher, what I had written in my nice new
notebook with its black-all-mixed-up-with-white cover
and smooth lined pages (so glad was | to get rid of my
old notebooks, which had on their covers a picture of a
wrinkled-up woman wearing a crown on her head and a

104

50

55

60

65

neckful and armfuls of diamonds and pearls—their
pages so coarse, as if they were made of cornmeal).

I flew home. I must have eaten my food, By half past
one, we Were sitting under a flamboyant tree ina
secluded part of our schoolyard, our auto-biographical
essays in hand. We were about to read aloud what

we had written during our morning of contemplation
and reflection, In response to Miss Nelson, each girl
stood up and read her composition. One girl told of a
much revered and loved aunt who now lived in
England and of how much she looked forward to

one day moving to England to live with her aunt; one
girl told of her brother studying medicine in Canada
and the life she imagined he lived there (it seemed
quite odd to me); one girl told of the fright she had
when she dreamed she was dead, and of the matching
fright she had when she woke and found that she
wasn’t (everyone laughed at this, and Miss Nelson
had to call us to order over and over); one girl told of
how her oldest sister’s best friend’s cousin’s best friend
(it was a real rigmarole) had gone on a Girl Guide

70 jamboree held in Trinidad and met someone who

75

millions of years ago had taken tea with Lady Baden-
Powell; one girl told of an excursion she and her
father had made to Redonda, and of how they had
seen some booby birds tending their chicks. Things
went on in that way, all so playful, all so imaginative.
I began to wonder about what I bad written, for it was
the opposite of playful and it was the opposite of
imaginative. What | had written was heartfelt, and,
except for the very end, it was all too true.

Which choice best summarizes the passage?

A) A character is apprehensive about attending
new school but is reassured by her teacher,
A character is excited about attending a new
school but struggles to make friends.

A character is eager to complete a school
assignment but becomes anxious after
observing her classmates’ work.

A character admires her teacher but is

disappointed by her teacher’s reaction to her
work.

B)

C)

D)

--- PAGE 104 ---
:

The primary purpose of the passage is to

A) describe the interactions between a young

‘ girl and her peers.

B) recount a memorable episode in a young

i girl’s life.

C) explain the influence of an important figure

on a young girl’s life.

D) explore the consequences of a young girl’s
decision,

TNR RENIN EAA TR LL rt is IO

aire

%
¥
Pa
t
NS

Ali RS EN END GEIS SRL LE OIE

j
A
4

105

ReasAt NI NIA EDD Renal AE RINE RAR Rasy

--- PAGE 105 ---
3.

10

i5

20

25

30

35

40

The following passage is adapted from Olympe de
Gouges, Declaration of the Rights of Women. It was
initially published in 1791, during the French Revolution,
and was written in response to the Declaration of the
Rights of Man (1789).

Woman, wake up, the toxin of reason is being
heard throughout the whole universe; discover your
rights. The powerful empire of nature ts no longer
surrounded by prejudice, fanaticism, superstition, and
lies. The flame of truth has dispersed all the clouds of
folly and usurpation. Enslaved man has multiplied his
strength and needs recourse to yours to break his chains.
Having become free, he has become unjust to his
companion, Oh, women, women! When will you cease
to be blind? What advantage have you received from
the Revolution? A more pronounced scorn, a more
marked disdain. In the centuries of corruption you ruled
only over the weakness of men. The reclamation of
your patrimony, based on the wise decrees of nature —
what have you to dread from such a fine undertaking?
Do you fear that our legislators, correctors of that
morality, long ensnared by political practices now out
of date, will only say again to you: women, what is
there in common between you and us? Everything, you
will have to answer. If they persist in their weakness in
putting this hypocrisy in contradiction to their
principles, courageously oppose the force of reason to
the empty pretensions of superiority; unite yourselves
beneath the standards of philosophy; deploy all the
energy of your character. Regardless of what barriers
confront you, it is in your power to free yourselves; you
have only to want to. Let us pass not to the shocking
tableau of what you have been in society; and since
national education is in question at this moment, let us
see whether our wise legislators will think judiciously
about the education of women.

Women have done more harm than good. Constraint
and dissimulation have been their lot. What force has
robbed them of, ruse returned to them; they had recourse
to all the resources of their charms, and the most
irreproachable persons did not resist them. Poison and
the sword were both subject to them; they commanded
in crime as in fortune. The French government, especially,
depended throughout the centuries on the nocturnal
administrations of women; the cabinet could keep no
secrets as a result of their indiscretions; all have been
subject to the cupidity and ambition of this sex,
formerly contemptible and respected, and since the
revolution, respectable and scorned.

106

45 In this sort of contradictory situation, what remarks

could I not make! I have but a moment to make them,

but this moment will fix the attention of the remotest

posterity. Under the Old Regime, all was vicious,

all was guilty; but could not the amelioration of

50 conditions be perceived even in the substance of
vices? A woman only had to be beautiful or lovable;
when she possessed these two advantages, she saw a
hundred fortunes at her feet. If she did not profit from
them, she had a bizarre character or a rare philosophy

55 which made her scorn wealth; then she was deemed
to be like a crazy woman. A young, inexperienced
woman, seduced by a man whom she loves, will
abandon her parents to follow him; the ingrate will
leave her after a few years, and the older she has

60 become with him, the more inhuman is his
inconstancy; if she has children, he will likewise
abandon them. If he is rich, he will consider himself
excused from sharing his fortune with his noble victims.
If some involvement binds him to his duties, he will

65 deny them, trusting that the laws will support him.
If he is married, any other obligation loses its rights.
Then what laws remain to extirpate vice ail the way to
its root? The law of dividing wealth and public
administration between men and women. It can easily

70 be seen that one who is born into a rich family gains
very much from such equal sharing. But the one born
into a poor family with merit and virtue — what is her
lot? Poverty and opprobrium. If she does not precisely
excel in music or painting, she cannot be admitted to

75 any public function when she has all! the capacity for it.

The central problem that the author describes in
the second paragraph (lines 32-44) is that women

A) are encouraged by their husbands to secretly
gather information.

have played a significant but unacknowledged
role in political life.

have been responsible for undermining their
own cause,

must play a more active role in civic life.

B)
C)

D)

--- PAGE 106 ---
i
:
}

{
I
;
H
i

iA RIE TIHERY BEN EES TOUS UE CADRE ast

tied ONO. R NEO

H
3
q
3
§
i
j
§

The author’s main point in the passage is that

A) women and men must work together to
improve conditions for women,

B) women must excel in the arts in order to gain
approval from society.

C) women must unite to demand the rights that
society has denied them.

D) women’s lack of rights can be primarily
attributed to government policies.

107

--- PAGE 107 ---
10

45

20

25

30

35

40

45

. The following passage is adapted from Julian Jackson,

“New Research Suggests Dinosaurs Were Warm-Blooded
and Active’ © 2011 by Julian Jackson.

New research from the University of Adelaide has
added to the debate about whether dinosaurs were cold-
blooded and sluggish or warm-blooded and active.
Professor Roger Seymour from the University's School
of Earth & Environmental Sciences has applied the
latest theories of human and animal anatomy and
physiology to provide insight into the lives of
dinosaurs.

Human thigh bones have tiny holes — known as the
“nutrient foramen” — on the shaft that supply blood to
living bone cells inside. New research has shown that
the size of those holes is related to the maximum rate
that a person can be active during aerobic exercise.
Professor Seymour has used this principle to evaluate
the activity levels of dinosaurs.

“Far from being lifeless, bone cells have a relatively
high metabolic rate and they therefore require a Jarge
blood supply to deliver oxygen. On the inside of the
bone, the blood supply comes usually from a single
artery and vein that pass through a hole on the shaft —
the nutrient foramen,” he says.

Professor Seymour wondered whether the size of
the nutrient foramen might indicate how much blood
was necessary to keep the bones in good repair. For
example, highly active animals might cause more bone
‘microfractures,’ requiring more frequent repairs by the
bone cells and therefore a greater blood supply. “My
aim was to see whether we could use fossil bones of
dinosaurs to indicate the level of bone metabolic rate
and possibly extend it to the whole body's metabolic
rate,” he says. “One of the big controversies among
paleobiologists is whether dinosaurs were cold-blooded
and sluggish or warm-blooded and active. Could the
size of the foramen be a possible gauge for dinosaur
metabolic rate?”

Comparisons were made with the sizes of the holes
in living mammals and reptiles, and their metabolic
rates. Measuring mammals ranging from mice to
elephants, and reptiles from lizards to crocodiles, one
of Professor Seymour’s Honors students, Sarah Smith,
combed the collections of Australian museums,
photographing and measuring hundreds of tiny holes in
thigh bones.

“The results were unequivocal. The sizes of the holes
were related closely to the maximum metabolic rates
during peak movement in mammals and reptiles,”
Professor Seymour says. “The holes found in mammals
were about 10 times larger than those in reptiles.”

108

These holes were compared to those of fossil
50 dinosaurs. Dr. Don Henderson, Curator of
Dinosaurs from the Royal Tyrrell Museum in
Alberta, Canada, and Daniela Schwarz-Wings from
the Museum fiir Naturkunde Humboldt University
Berlin, Germany measured the holes in 10 species of
dinosaurs from five different groups, including
bipedal and quadrupedal carnivores and herbivores,
weighing 50kg to 20,000kg.

“On a relative comparison to eliminate the
differences in body size, all of the dinosaurs had
holes in their thigh bones larger than those of
mammals,” Professor Seymour says.

“The dinosaurs appeared to be even more active
than the mammals. We certainly didn't expect to see
that. These results provide additional weight to
65 theories that dinosaurs were warm-blooded and

highly active creatures, rather than cold-blooded
and sluggish.”
Professor Seymour says following the results of
this study, it’s likely that a simple measurement of
70 foramen size could be used to evaluate maximum
activity levels in other vertebrate animals.

55

60

The main purpose of the passage is to
A) Describe an experiment to resolve a scientific
controversy and discuss its results.
Refute a commonly held belief about dinosaur
behavior.

B)
C) Compare the development of dinosaur bones
to the development of mammal bones.

D) Explain how foramen size has been used to
gauge activity levels in mammals.

--- PAGE 108 ---
{
j
:
;
j

is
$
§
4
t
z

i
Fs
}
j
i
3

padre iepaainama acre

SERRA GRANDES GATE OMIA

bys AST NRESIP TE e bate

i
4

ADDO ANCE IRENA PEELED LE LIES LANL MSIL DIMOY TINA EN EAI SBN RIA IGE IRICEN IDO

he

Which of the following best summarizes the
findings of Professor Seymour’s study?

A) Foramen size can be used as a measure of
growth rate in dinosaurs and other animals.

B) The density of dinosaurs’ thigh bones
conclusively proves that dinosaurs were
warm-blooded.

C) The size of dinosaurs’ foramens indicates
that dinosaurs may have behaved more like
mammals than like reptiles.

D) The size of the holes in the shafts of dinosaurs’

thigh bones strongly suggests that dinosaurs
were warm-blooded.

109

--- PAGE 109 ---
5.

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

This passage is adapted from a 1950 speech by Dean
Acheson, who served as Secretary of State from 1949
to 1953 and strongly influenced United States foreign
policy during the Cold War.

However much we may sympathize with the
Soviet citizens who for reasons bedded deep in history
are obliged to live under it, we are not attempting to
change the governmental or social structure of the Soviet
Union. The Soviet regime, however, has devoted a major
portion of its energies and resources to the attempt to
impose its system on other peoples. In this attempt it
has shown itself prepared to resort to any method or
stratagem, including subversion, threats, and even
military force.

Therefore, if the two systems are to coexist, some
acceptable means must be found to free the world from
the destructive tensions and anxieties of which it has
been the victim in these past years and the continuance
of which can hardly be in the interests of any people.

I wish, therefore, to speak to you about those points
of greatest difference which must be identified and
sooner or later reconciled if the two systems are to live
together, if not with mutual respect, at least in
reasonable security.

It is now nearly 5 years since the end of hostilities,
and the victorious Allies have been unable to define the
terms of peace with the defeated countries. This is a
grave, a deeply disturbing fact. For our part, we do not
intend nor wish, in fact we do not know how, to create
satellites. Nor can we accept a settlement which would
make Germany, Japan, or liberated Austria satellites of
the Soviet Union. The experience in Hungary, Rumania,
and Bulgaria has been one of bitter disappointment and
shocking betrayal of the solemn pledges by the wartime
Allies. The Soviet leaders joined in the pledge at Tehran
that they looked forward “with confidence to the day
when all peoples of the world may live free lives,
untouched by tyranny, and according to their varying
desires and their own consciences.” We can accept
treaties of peace which would give reality to this pledge
and to the interests of all in security.

With regard to the whole group of countries which
we are accustomed to thinking of as the satellite area, the
Soviet leaders could withdraw their military and police
force and refrain from using the shadow of that force to
keep in power persons or regimes which do not command
the confidence of the respective peoples, freely expressed
through orderly representative processes.

110

45 In this connection, we do not insist that these
governments have any particular political or social
complexion. What concerns us is that they should be
truly independent national regimes, with a will of their
own and with a decent foundation in popular feeling.

The Soviet leaders could cooperate with us to the
end that the official representatives of all countries are
treated everywhere with decency and respect and that
an atmosphere is created in which these representatives
could function in a normal and helpful manner,

55 conforming to the accepted codes of diplomacy.

These are some of the things which we feel that
Soviet leaders could do which would permit the
rational and peaceful development of the coexistence
of their system and ours. They are not things that go to

60 the depths of the moral conflict. They have been
formulated by us, not as moralists but as servants of
government, anxious to get on with the practical
problems that lie before us and to get on with them in
a manner consistent with mankind’s deep longing for a
respite from fear and uncertainty.

Nor have they been formulated as a one-sided
bargain. A will to achieve binding, peaceful settlements
would be required of all participants. All would have
to produce unmistakable evidence of their good faith,
All would have to accept agreements in the observance
of which all nations could have real confidence.

The United States is ready, as it has been and always
will be, to cooperate in genuine efforts to find peaceful
settlements. Our attitude is not inflexible, our opinions
are not frozen, our positions are not and will not be
obstacles to peace. But it takes more than one to
cooperate. If the Soviet Union could join in doing these
things I have outlined, we could all face the future with
greater security. We could look forward to more than
the eventual reduction of some of the present tensions.
We could anticipate a return to a more normal and
relaxed diplomatic atmosphere and to progress in the
transaction of some of the international business which
needs so urgently to be done.

50

65

70

75

80

--- PAGE 110 ---
RAE RTT RG Morita

Se RCE SL FRE AL AEN TON WL INR

e
§
f
2
4
$

ceed TER ETRE GAA DRM AE I OBE AULT SA IEEE ABIL OMEN IIB REMIT LE

pO ENO eh

tenn eee ae ACA MR BORNE APOE

What is the main idea of the passage?

A)

B)

C)

D)

The primary purpose of the passage is to

A)

B)

C)

D)

The Soviet Union’s failure to adhere to
international agreements poses an immediate
threat to American security.

Relations between the Soviet Union and the
United States will improve if the Soviet Union
permits its satellite states greater political self-
determination.

The Soviet Union wil! be unable to conduct
normal relations with other countries until
communism has been thoroughly destroyed.
The conduct of the United States toward the
Soviet Union is a moral dilemma that cannot
be easily resolved.

Criticize the Soviet Union for its harsh
treatment of peoples under its rule.

Suggest that the Soviet Union should model
its diplomatic process on that of the United
States.

Propose a course of action that would result
in a reduction of tension between the Soviet
Union and the United States.

Decry the use of a force as a tool for
maintaining international order.

The main idea of the fourth paragraph (lines 21-37)
is that

A)

B)

C)

D)

Leaders must act according to their conscience
as well as their desires.

Control of Soviet satellites will be granted

to the United States if the Soviet Union
continues to behave unreliably.

Soviet control of Germany, Japan, and Austria
would inevitably end in disaster.

The Soviet Union must abide by its promises
in order for the United States to accept its
treaties.

111

--- PAGE 111 ---
6. The following passage is adapted from George Orwell,
“Keep the Aspidistra Flying,” first published in 1936.
Gordon, the protagonist, is a poet,

Gordon walked homeward against the rattling wind,
which blew his hair backward and gave him more of a
‘good’ forehead than ever. His manner conveyed to the
passers-by — at least, he hoped it did—that if he wore

5 no overcoat it was from pure caprice.

Willowbed Road, NW, was dingy and depressing,
although it contrived to keep up a kind of mingy
decency. There was even a dentist's brass plate on one
of the houses. In quite two-thirds of them, amid the

10 lace curtains of the parlor window, there was a green
card with ‘Apartments’ on it in silver lettering, above the
peeping foliage of an aspidistra.*

Mrs. Wisbeach, Gordon's landlady, specialized in
‘single gentlemen.’ Bed-sitting-rooms, with gaslight laid

15 on and find your own heating, baths extra (there was a
geyser), and meals in the tomb-dark dining-room with
the phalanx of clotted sauce-bottles in the middle of
the table. Gordon, who came home for his midday dinner,
paid twenty-seven and six a week.

20 ~—«‘ The gaslight shone yellow through the frosted tansom
above the door of Number 31. Gordon took out his key
and fished about in the keyhole ~ in that kind of house
the key never quite fits the lock. The darkish little
hallway — in reality it was only a passage — smelt of

25 dishwater and cabbage. Gordon glanced at the japanned
tray on the hall-stand. No letters, of course. He had
told himself not to hope for a letter, and nevertheless
had continued to hope. A stale feeling, not quite a pain,
settled upon his breast. Rosemary might have written!

30 It was four days now since she had written. Moreover,
he had sent out to magazines and had not yet had returned
to him. The one thing that made the evening bearable
was to find a letter waiting for him when he got home.
But he received very few letters — four or five in a week

35 at the very most.

On the left of the hall was the never-used parlor,
then came the staircase, and beyond that the passage ran
down to the kitchen and to the unapproachable lair
inhabited by Mrs. Wisbeach herself. As Gordon came in,

40 the door at the end of the passage opened a foot or so.
Mrs. Wisbeach’s face emerged, inspected him briefly
but suspiciously, and disappeared again. It was quite
impossible to get in or out of the house, at any time
before eleven at night, without being scrutinized in this

45 manner, Just what Mrs. Wisbeach suspected you of it

112

50

55

60

65

70

75

was hard to say, She was one of those malignant
respectable women who keep lodging-houses. Age
about forty-five, stout but active, with a pink, fine-
featured, horribly observant face, beautifully grey hair,
and a permanent grievance.

In the familiar darkness of his room, Gordon felt for
the gas-jet and lighted it. The room was medium-sized,
not big enough to be curtained into two, but too big to
be sufficiently warmed by one defective oi! lamp. It had
the sort of furniture you expect in a top floor back.
White-quilted single-bed; brown lino floor-covering;
wash-hand-stand with jug and basin of that cheap white
ware which you can never see without thinking of
chamberpots. On the window-sill there was a sickly
aspidistra in a green-glazed pot.

Up against this, under the window, there was a
kitchen table with an inkstained green cloth. This was
Gordon’s ‘writing’ table. It was only after a bitter
struggle that he had induced Mrs. Wisbeach to give him
a kitchen table instead of the bamboo ‘occasional’
table — a mere stand for the aspidistra - which she
considered proper for a top floor back. And even now
there was endless nagging because Gordon would never
allow his table to be ‘tidied up.’ The table was ina
permanent mess. It was almost covered with a muddle
of papers, perhaps two hundred sheets, grimy and
dog-eared, and all written on and crossed out and written
on again — a sort of sordid labyrinth of papers to which
only Gordon possessed the key. There was a film of
dust over everything. Except for a few books on the
mantelpiece, this table, with its mess of papers, was the
sole mark Gordon’s personality had Jeft on the room.

*a bulbous plant with broad leaves, often used as a
houseplant.

--- PAGE 112 ---
%
‘
2
i
é
}

Lata gota

Paes teat

4
i
e
FY
g
Ef
£
5
ib

ARAN A er ENN Cee moo ANS.

4
€
:
:
7
4
s
3
j
2
z
;
Hi
$
4

NU ete 4H

4
1
&
4
i
:
}
&
i
z
i
i
:
t

Which choice correctly states the order of events
in the passage?

A) Acharacter arrives home, is briefly observed
by another character, and retires unhappily to
his room,

B) A character arrives home, finds a letter that
he has been expecting, and races to his room
to read it.

C) A ccharacter sneaks into his house, then is
stopped by another character with whom he
has an unpleasant encounter.

D) A character who is waiting for a letter learns
that it has not been sent; later, he narrowly
avoids being seen by another character.

The primary purpose of the passage is to

A) describe the habits of a somewhat eccentric
character.

B) illustrate the difficulties involved in being a
writer.

C) foreshadow an ominous development in a
character’s life.

D) depict an unusual occurrence in a character’s
routine.

113

--- PAGE 113 ---
Explanations: The Big Picture Exercises

1.1¢

To find the answer to this question, focus on the end of the passage - the place where the author
describes the true significance of all the technology he’s described. The point is that big data
allows people to see the big picture, and to identify relationships between seemingly unrelated
phenomena. The correct answer must be related to that idea in some way. A) is very specific,
referring only to “bytes.” Likewise, D) focuses on science fiction, which is discussed in only a
small part of the passage. Be careful with B) - it’s supported by the passage (lines 16-19), but it’s
not a main idea. C) is much more general and consistent with the overall focus of the passage: the
fact that new technology has changed the way data is acquired (through bytes) and analyzed (to
reveal hidden relationships).

1.2D

The key to answering this question is to understand that the author uses the “tree” and “balloon”
metaphors. He's essentially saying that until now, people have only been able to examine various
events in isolation, but that with massive data sets, we will be able to understand the big picture
in a way that was impossible before. That corresponds to D), making it the correct answer.

2.1C

To simplify this question, focus on the beginning and the end of the passage, using the answer
choices to guide you. Each choice contains “attitude” words, so play positive/negative. The
character's attitude at the beginning is positive, as indicated by the exclamation points in line 9
and the phrase I joined the happy half. A) can be eliminated because it begins with a negative word
(apprehensive). Now consider the end. In line 76, the narrator states I began to wonder at what I had
written, for it was the opposite of playful, indicating that she is questioning herself (negative).
Unfortunately, B), C), and D) all end with negative attitude words. (Even though it does not help
here, this step is still important because you may be able to use it to identify the correct answer to
other questions.) So think about the context: the narrator isn’t “struggling to make friends,” so
eliminate B). Nor is she “disappointed by her teacher’s reaction to her work” - in fact, we have no
information about how her teacher reacted. That leaves C), which correctly corresponds to the
fact that the narrator becomes nervous after listening to her classmates read their work.

2.2. B

If you were to answer this question very quickly in your own words, you might say something
along the lines of “describe some stuff that happened to this girl at school.” That might not get
you to the answer, but it would get you thinking in the right direction. A) doesn’t quite fit: the
passage only briefly alludes to the narrator's interaction with her peers. You might not be sure
about B), so leave it. C) might seem attractive, but think carefully: although the narrator is very
clear that she admires her teacher, we don’t get any information about Miss Nelson’s specific
influence on the narrator's life. D) is incorrect because the only decision the narrator makes in the
passage is to write her “auto-biographical” essay about a topic important to her, and the passage
does not really describe the consequences of that decision beyond indicating that the narrator
was nervous about reading her work. So that leaves B), which is the only answer general enough
to encompass the entire passage.

114

--- PAGE 114 ---
i
:
:
3
A
Z
q
i
5

HRA RSMO AE ANM ERE IE APL EPS PO EES PR IAB. DHE IRE NI IONE RED)

VEAP M ANGIE EN ABLE LER LIS PRONE g JAE INEL MENG MOE

3.1¢

Don’t be fooled by the long line reference. You only need the first sentence to answer the
question. De Gouges’ assertion that Women have done more harm than good directly corresponds to
the idea that women have undermined their own cause. The answer is therefore C).

3.2C

If you've written the main point (women must demand rights/stop hurting each other), you can
probably jump right to C). Otherwise, focus on the beginning of the passage, where de Gouges
makes her most impassioned pleas. Throughout the whole first section, she begs women to stand
up and reclaim their rights. In line 23, toward the end of the introduction, she directly calls upon
women to uyite. Playing process of elimination, A) is incorrect because de Gouges asserts that
women must take their rights on their own, without waiting for men to help them. (In lines 16-23,
she implies that men will resist women’s attempts at claiming their rights.) Although de Gouges
does mention that women can gain a position in society only by excelling in music or painting, B)
is incorrect because that is a secondary point (mentioned in one place) compared to her insistence
that women must demand their rights. D) is incorrect because de Gouges implies that society as a
whole, including women themselves, is responsible for women’s inferior position.

4.1A

Lines 31-35 provide the exact information you need to answer this question. The passage
describes Professor Seymour's experiment, which was designed to resolve the “big controversy”
of whether dinosaurs were warm-blooded or cold-blooded.

4.2D

Although it might seem tempting to start by looking at the answers, it is worthwhile to take a
moment and state the answer in your own words before looking at the choices. If you’re not sure,
look at the end of the passage - a good part of the answer is right there in lines 64-68. What were
Professor Seymour's findings? Basically, that the large size of the holes in the dinosaurs’ thigh
bones strongly suggests that dinosaurs were warm-blooded and active. That makes D) the
answer, A) is incorrect because Professor Seymour used foramen size as an indicator of metabolic
rate, not growth rate. The use of foramen size was also a starting point of his experiment, not a
finding. B) is incorrect because the focus was on the size of the holes in dinosaurs’ thigh bones,
not the density. Furthermore, the study “proved” nothing; it simply added weight to the theory
that dinosaurs were warm-blooded. C) is incorrect because the passage says nothing about the
relationship between foramen size and behavior.

5.1B

Although this is a big-picture question, the answer is actually located in the middle of the
passage, in the fifth through seventh paragraphs (lines 38-55). There, Acheson states that the
United States could accept treaties of peace if the Soviet Union were willing to withdraw their military
and police force and refrain from using the shadow of that force to keep in power persons or regimes which
do not conmand the confidence of the respective peoples, freely expressed through orderly representative
processes... What concerns us is that they should be truly independent national regimes, with a will of their
own and with a decent foundation in popular feeling. In other words, relations between the United
States and the Soviet Union could begin to normalize if the Soviets were willing to allow areas
under their control to develop independent systems of rule, ie., if they “permit[ed] greater
political self-determination.” A) and C) are too extreme and too negative; Acheson’s tone is one
of reasonableness and moderation. D) is off-topic: the focus is on specific political steps that the
Soviets could take to normalize relations with the United States, not on moral concerns.

115

--- PAGE 115 ---
5.2C

This is essentially the same question as 5.1, just phrased a little differently. What is Acheson’s
point? That the United States wants to find a way to peacefully coexist with the Soviet Union. In
other words, he wants the tension between those countries to be reduced, making C) the answer.
Be careful with A). Although Acheson does criticize the Soviets’ treatment of people living under
its regime, that is not his main point. There is no information to support B), and D) goes far
beyond the passage. The focus is specifically on US-Soviet relations, not international order in
general.

5.3D

The fact that you have a 17-line reference indicates that you do not need to read the whole thing.
Focus on the beginning and the end. In this case, the beginning doesn’t provide much
information relevant to the question. The end, however, gives you more to work with. The
statement that We cait accept treaties of peace tat would give reality to this pledge and to the interests of
all in security indicates that the United States would be willing to work with the Soviet Union if
the latter would keep its promises. That idea corresponds directly to D).

6.1A

Start by focusing on the beginning of the passage and matching it to the beginning of one of the
answer choices. What does the very beginning of the passage indicate? That Gordon is on his
way home. That corresponds most directly to A) and B), so eliminate C) and D). If you have a
pretty good grasp of the passage, there’s a good chance you remember that Gordon did not
receive a letter, eliminating B). Otherwise, focus on the end of the passage. It’s a description of
Gordon’s room, and there’s nothing about a letter, again pointing to A).

6.24

The passage basically recounts an episode from Gordon’s life: he comes home, he tries
unsuccessfully to avoid his nosy landlady, and then he goes to his extremely messy room. There’s
absolutely nothing to suggest that something bad is going to happen to him, nor is there any
information that would suggest that the events of the passage are anything unusual in Gordon’s
life. That eliminates C) and D). B) might seem tempting to you, but the passage doesn’t really
focus on the fact that Gordon is a writer, or the difficulties of that career. The descriptions are
more intended to illustrate that Gordon is a somewhat odd person (=somewhat eccentric), a
purpose that corresponds to A).

116

--- PAGE 116 ---
PNA ANNs OCce

AN Ie iA EENDGMY SISSY SEND TY SOREL UNS! NOS ore EN AES ADMLE BAD A NM 3 0 RAI EMCO IR CME SSM RT IG STERN OR aI ha9

Which choice provides the best evidence for

Supporting Evidence

Before we go any further, it would strongly behoove us to take a look at one of the key
features of the redesigned SAT: paired “supporting evidence” questions.

If you look through an SAT Reading Test, you'll undoubtedly notice a number of questions
that look like this:

the answer to the previous question? i

A) Lines 5-7 (“This...declaration”)
B) Lines 24-25 (“It...answers”)

C) Lines 44-46 (“Between... past’)
D) Lines 46-48 (“Still...issued”’)

The first time most people look at this type of question, their reaction is something along the
lines of, “Whoa, that looks really complicated.”

While these questions are not necessarily easy (although some of them can be surprisingly
straightforward), they are generally not nearly as complicated as they appear - provided
that you’re prepared and willing to work through them very systematically.

But first, the basics. Supporting evidence questions are primarily paired with two other
question types: literal comprehension (questions that ask what the passage states or
indicates), and inference (questions that ask what the passage suggests or implies). As we'll
see in Chapters 5 and 6, these two question types are actually very similar. In some cases,
they are nearly interchangeable. While not every single literal comprehension and inference
question will be followed by a supporting evidence question, the vast majority will follow
this pattern.

Next, the most important thing to understand is that paired questions are not really two
questions at all but rather a single question asked two different ways. In fact, the
information needed to answer the first question will always be contained among the
answer choices to the second question. The answer to the first question is essentially a
rephrased version of the correct lines cited in the second question. True supporting evidence
questions - ones that ask you to identify the lines that support an idea discussed in the
passage ~ are much less common, appearing no more than a few times per test.

117

--- PAGE 117 ---
Third, supporting evidence pairs come in two types. In the vast majority of cases, the first
question will not contain a line reference. From time to time, however, it will contain a line
reference. Unless you are an extraordinarily strong reader who can simply read and answer
every question in order, the two types of questions can require different approaches.

As mentioned earlier, you should take a few moments upfront, before you answer any of the
questions, and mark the supporting evidence question pairs. Furthermore, when a literal
comprehension or inference question appears at the bottom of a page, you MUST
remember to check the following page for a supporting evidence question.

If you don’t know any better, a likely reaction to these types of questions is as follows: you
read the first question and, realizing that there’s no line reference, return to the passage and
begin to hunt for the answer. You have a general idea of where it might be, but when you
check that spot and don’t see it, you start to get a little nervous.

You start skimming faster and faster, your eyes racing over the page, until finally you see
something that seems to fit. You're not totally sure, but you've already spent a few minutes
looking and can’t afford to waste any more time, so you bubble the answer in.

When you see that the next question is a supporting evidence question, your stomach sinks.
You think that the right answer should be somewhere around the spot where you found the
answer to the previous question, but none of quotes are located there.

One by one, you plug in each of the answers. You get rid of two choices that are clearly
wrong, but the remaining answers both seem possible. You sit and stare at them, not sure
how to choose. You still have half a section left, though, so you need to move on. Finally,
you pick the one that feels a little more right and hope for the best.

This scenario is one you want to avoid at all costs. If it occurs multiple times, you'll get tired
very quickly - and you'll still have two Math sections to go.

The key to answering paired questions is to plug the answer choices from the second
question into the first question, then use that information to answer both questions
simultaneously.

The line references in the second question tell you that the answer to the first question is
located either in or very close to one of the four sections of the passage cited. Instead of
randomly scanning the passage for the answer to the first question and wasting untold
amounts of time and energy in the process, using the answers to the second question allows
you to focus on four specific places - one of which must provide the correct answer

That is why marking question pairs is so important: if you don’t know a supporting
evidence question is coming, you can’t use the second question to help you.

118

--- PAGE 118 ---
So, for example, a set of questions that looks like this...

|
The author indicates which of the following
about mixed-use developments?

A) They are a recent development.

B) They reduce architectural variety.

C) They create healthier neighborhoods.

D) They increase dependence on automobiles.

Which choice provides the best evidence for
the answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 5-7 (“This...complicated”)
B) Lines 24-25 (“It...recognized”)
C) Lines 44-46 (“Between... past”)
D) Lines 46-48 (“Still...issued”)

...can be rewritten to look like this:

The author indicates which of the following
about mixed-use developments?

A) Lines 5-7 (“This...complicated”)
B) Lines 24-25 (“It... recognized”)
C) Lines 44-46 (“Between... past”)
D) Lines 46-48 (“Still...issued”’)

i
i
H
é
i
g

PERERA TRRO IANS Oren

Then, one by one, read each line reference and determine whether it provides the answer to
Question #1. When you find the correct set of lines, you have the answers to both questions.

Remember that you do not necessarily need to check the line references in order. If you
remember that the topic of Question #1 was discussed in a particular part of the passage and
see a line reference corresponding to that section, you might want to start with it.

Important; In some instances, it may be necessary to read before and/or after a line
reference for context. If you read the lines in question and are unsure whether they answer
the question, do not - I repeat, do not - eliminate the answer simply because you are
confused. Read a sentence or two before to a sentence or two after to see where the lines fit
within the argument.

RRA i RAEN Ae RGA GR POM ARUN SAD SCTE eth SEBS BURN EIR EI ES IEA A SEND SANOEN MSRM NS NN

119

A einen AAEM ANDY A GOO ENING

--- PAGE 119 ---
Supporting and Contradicting Claims

At this point, we’re going to consider another type of question whose answers involve sets of
line references. Although these questions and answers may look similar to the examples
we ve just looked at, there are some important differences,

First, these questions are not part of paired sets but rather appear alone. Second, their
answers consist solely of lines references; you must identify the lines that support an idea
discussed within the passage. In some cases, you may also be asked to identify the lines that
contradict an idea or claim described in the question.

Note: As mentioned earlier, these questions appear much less frequently than supporting
evidence pairs, typically no more than a couple of times per test. That said, more of them are
included on the administered exams in the Official Guide (Tests 5-8) than on the earlier, non-
administered tests, so it appears that they are becoming a fixture of the exam.

If you approach these questions methodically, they can become quite straightforward. But
you can’t get impatient, and you can’t skip steps, no matter how much you want to just get the
answer. If you're not really certain what a question is asking, OR you don’t feel that you can

focus properly, you are better off simply skipping it and returning to it if you have time.

The process for answering single supporting evidence questions can be broken into three
main steps:

1) Identify the claim, and rephrase it if necessary.

If the claim is stated simply in the question, underline it. If it's worded more complexly,
rephrase it more simply and write it down. You can’t determine whether a set of lines would
support an idea unless you know what that idea is.

2) Determine what sort of information would support the claim.

You should at least attempt to do this on your own and not assume you'll be able to
recognize the information from the answer choices,

3) Check the answers.

Remember that in some cases, you may need to read above/below the lines referenced for
context. Remember also not to eliminate any answers just because you find them confusing.

On the next page, we're going to look at an example.

120

--- PAGE 120 ---
SA RAR SEN ORE aA NIE AEGINA NEM ORIEL NCE METIS LABEL SIEGE LOGE WIDER ETRE SEN EEA NDR GLE DPA EAE TIES ILEA EA BAENGDNE (’ HOLEELI ABER LEN EBA RSP NESE ARISE A IS ST

;
t
i
¢
i
i
j
1
j
i
$
i
j
i
z
}
I
j

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

This passage is adapted from Barry Schwartz, “More
Isn't Always Better,” © 2006 by Harvard Business
Review.

Marketers assume that the more choices they offer,
the more likely customers will be able to find just the
right thing. They assume, for instance, that offering 50
styles of jeans instead of two increases the chances that
shoppers will find a pair they really like. Nevertheless,
research now shows that there can be too much choice;
when there is, consumers are less likely to buy anything
at all, and if they do buy, they are less satisfied with
their selection.

It all began with jam. In 2000, psychologists Sheena

Iyengar and Mark Lepper published a remarkable study.

On one day, shoppers at an upscale food market saw a
display table with 24 varieties of gourmet jam. Those

who sampled the spreads received a coupon for $1 off
any jam. On another day, shoppers saw a similar table,

except that only six varieties of the jam were on display.

The large display attracted more interest than the small
one. But when the time came to purchase, people who
saw the large display were one-tenth as likely to buy as
people who saw the small display.

Other studies have confirmed this result that more
choice is not always better. As the variety of snacks,
soft drinks, and beers offered at convenience stores
increases, for instance, sales yolume and customer
satisfaction decrease. Moreover, as the number of
retirement investment options available to employees
increases, the chance that they will choose any
decreases. These studies and others have shown not
only that excessive choice can produce “choice
paralysis,” but also that it can reduce people’s
satisfaction with their decisions, even if they made
good ones. My colleagues and I have found that
increased choice decreases satisfaction with matters as
trivial as ice cream flavors and as significant as jobs.

These results challenge what we think we know
about human nature and the determinants of well-being.
Both psychology and business have operated on the
assumption that the relationship between choice and
well-being is straightforward: The more choices people
have, the better off they are. In psychology, the benefits
of choice have been tied to autonomy and control. In
business, the benefits of choice have been tied to the
benefits of free markets more generally. Added options
make no one worse off, and they are bound to make
someone better off.

Choice is good for us, but its relationship to
satisfaction appears to be more complicated than we

121

50

55

60

65

70

75

had assumed, There is diminishing marginal utility in
having alternatives; each new option subtracts a little
from the feeling of well-being, until the marginal
benefits of added choice level off. What’s more,
psychologists and business academics alike have
largely ignored another outcome of choice: More of it
requires increased time and effort and can lead to
anxiety, regret, excessively high expectations, and
self-blame if the choices don’t work out. When the
number of available options is small, these costs

are negligible, but the costs grow with the number of
options. Eventually, each new option makes us feel
worse off than we did before.

Without a doubt, having more options enables us,
most of the time, to achieve better objective outcomes,
Again, having 50 styles of jeans as opposed to two
increases the likelihood that customers will find a pair
that fits. But the subjective outcome may be that
shoppers will feel overwhelmed and dissatisfied. This
dissociation between objective and subjective results
creates a significant challenge for retailers and
marketers that look to choice as a way to enhance the
perceived value of their goods and services.

Choice can no longer be used to justify a marketing
strategy in and of itself. More isn’t always better,
either for the customer or for the retailer.

Discovering how much assortment is warranted is a
considerable empirical challenge, But companies that
get the balance right will be amply rewarded.

Which choice best supports the author’s claim that
an excess of choice can lead consumers to become
overwhelmed?

A) Lines 3-5 (“They...like”)

B) Lines 18-20 (“people...display”)

C) Lines 46-48 (“Choice...assumed”)

D) Lines 73-75 (“Discovering...challenge”)

--- PAGE 121 ---
Although this question asks about the relationship between ideas in the passage, it is
unnecessary to find the original claim in the passage. Even if you hadn’t read a word of the
passage, the question would still tell you exactly what idea you needed to find supporting
evidence for - namely, that an excess of choice can overwhelm consumers.

That's a pretty straightforward argument, but if you wanted to restate it more simply to keep
yourself focused, you could write something like, “Too much choice = BAD.” Now all you
have to do is find the lines that most directly support that idea. That’s the main point of the
passage, so the answer could be pretty much anywhere. As a result, we can simply check the
answers in order.

A) They assume, for mstance, that offering 50 styles of jeans instead of two increases the
chances that shoppers will find a pair they really like.

No. We’re looking for an option that discusses choice leading to dissatisfaction. These lines
discuss exactly the opposite idea.

B) People who saw the large display were one-tenth as likely to buy as people who saw the
small display.

Yes, this fits. Consider the context: the author is describing the outcome of Iyengar and
Lepper’s study, which found that people who are given too many options are often unable to
decide at all. If you’re clear about that, you can stop right here. If you’re not sure, however,
keep going.

C) Choice is good for us, but its relationship to satisfaction appears to be more complicated
than we had assumed.

Be careful here. The lines indicate that the relationship between choice and satisfaction is
problematic, but they don’t directly support the idea that people are overwhelmed by too
many choices,

D) Discovering how much assortment is warranted is a considerable empirical challenge.

This is the “confusing” answer, filled with unusual phrasing and abstract, challenging
phrasing (warranted, considerable entpirical challenge). In context, these lines simply indicate
that it isn’t yet clear when choice stops being a good thing and starts being a bad one. So no,
this answer is off-topic.

The answer is therefore B).

122

--- PAGE 122 ---
i
4
:
5
3
i

s
:
¥

Me Yt i ORLY SIP NRE EHAA ERENCE AIR

;
:
j
g
4
4
é
i
i

PE ya miRNA MRM LEN A BLE LAAEE EI BA AED

A marketer claims that more choices are always
beneficial. Which of the following statements in
the passage contradicts the marketer’s claim?

A) Lines 3-5 (“They...like”)

B) Lines 18-20 (“people...display”)

C) Lines 46-48 (“Choice...assumed”)

D) Lines 73-75 (“Discovering...challenge”)

This question could also be asked the other way around, as a “contradict” question:

First of all, note that although this question is phrased from the opposite perspective, it is
actually the exact same question we just worked through.

Because the phrasing of the question is more complicated and thus potentially more
confusing, it is definitely worth your while to take a moment and simplify/rewrite the
question before looking at the answer choices.

The question is asking us to identify what idea in the passage contradicts the marketer’s
claim, so the correct answer must state the opposite of the marketer’s claim. To find the idea
you're looking for, simply stick the word NOT into the original claim.

Original claim: more choice = beneficial
Negated: more choice = NOT beneficial
Therefore, the correct answer must support the idea that more choice is NOT beneficial.

With this information, you can work through the answer choices the same way as in the
previous question, checking each option against the idea that more choice is NOT better.
Again, B) is the only choice that fits.

Important: Even if you are a very strong reader with an excellent memory, it is very
important that you write down each step of questions like this. Although you may not have
any difficulty answering them, it is all too easy to forget and accidentally look for an idea
that is exactly the opposite of the one you should be looking for, Sooner or later, there’s a
good chance you'll slip up and lose what should have been relatively easy points. This is not
about your ability to get questions right, but rather to ensure that you don’t get questions
wrong. Memories do strange things under pressure, and you're better off not taking the risk.

123

--- PAGE 123 ---
w

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Supporting and Contradicting Claims Exercises

The sharing economy is a little like online
shopping, which started in America [5 years ago. At
first, people were worried about security. But having
made a successful purchase from, say, Amazon, they
felt safe buying elsewhere. Similarly, using Airbnb or
a car-hire service for the first time encourages people to
try other offerings. Next, consider eBay. Having started
out as a peer-to-peer marketplace, it is now dominated
by professional “power sellers” (many of whom started
out as ordinary eBay users). The same may happen with
the sharing economy, which also provides new
opportunities for enterprise. Some people have bought
cars solely to rent them out, for example. Incumbents
are getting involved too. Avis, a car-hire firm, has a share

in a sharing rival. So do GM and Daimler, two carmakers.

In the future, companies may develop hybrid models,
listing excess capacity (whether vehicles, equipment or
office space) on peer-to-peer rental sites. In the past,
new ways of doing things online have not displaced the
old ways entirely. But they have often changed them.
Just as internet shopping forced Walmart and Tesco to
adapt, so online sharing will shake up transport, tourism,
equipment-hire and more.

The main worry is regulatory uncertainty. Will
room-4-renters be subject to hotel taxes, for example?
In Amsterdam officials are using Airbnb listings to track
down unlicensed hotels. In some American cities,
peer-to-peer taxi services have been banned after
lobbying by traditional taxi firms. The danger is that
although some rules need to be updated to protect
consumers from harm, incumbents will try to destroy
competition. People who rent out rooms should pay tax,
of course, but they should not be regulated like a Ritz-
Carlton hotel. The lighter rules that typically govern
bed-and-breakfasts are more than adequate. The sharing
economy is the latest example of the internet’s value to
consumers. This emerging model is now big and
disruptive enough for regulators and companies to have
woken up to it. That is a sign of its immense potential. It
is time to start caring about sharing.

124

Which choice provides the best evidence for
the author’s claim that sharing-based companies
may face serious challenges from established
companies?

A) Lines 5-7 (“Similarly...offerings”)
B) Lines 14-15 (“Avis...rival’”}

C) Lines 27-29 (“In...firms”)

D) Lines 32-34 (“People...hote!l”)

--- PAGE 124 ---
X

5

10

diabetes ines

45

DP Kee greta eT dS

20

25

30

2
t
¥
$
é
3

35

40

EIRP PVE AEGEAN RERE EVE BACLT BIS AE IST

45

ENCES a RATE LAR NOLL AEFI ING HINMY

eS BA te NEON MO COREE ORCS ANNE ENGEIR Se ODEN EA IPE LIR YOGA ANE

ais aaa ieeieiial

This passage is adapted from Abraham Lincoln’s First
Inaugural Address, delivered in 1861.

I hold that in contemplation of universal law and of
the Constitution the Union of these States is
perpetual...

If the United States be not a government proper, but
an association of States in the nature of contract merely,
can it, as a contract, be peaceably unmade by less than
all the parties who made it? One party to a contract may
violate it—break it, so to speak—but does it not
require all to lawfully rescind it?

Descending from these general principles, we find
the proposition that in legal contemplation the Union is
perpetual confirmed by the history of the Union itself.
The Union is much older than the Constitution. It was
formed, in fact, by the Articles of Association in 1774.
It was matured and continued by the Declaration of
Independence in 1776. It was further matured, and the
faith of all the then thirteen States expressly plighted
and engaged that it should be perpetual, by the Articles
of Confederation in 1778. And finally, in 1787, one of
the declared objects for ordaining and establishing the
Constitution was “to form a more perfect Union.”

But if destruction of the Union by one or by a part
only of the States be lawfully possible, the Union is
less perfect than before the Constitution, having lost the
vital element of perpetuity.

It follows from these views that no State upon its
own mere motion can lawfully get out of the Union;
that resolves and ordinances to that effect are legally
void, and that acts of violence within any State or
States against the authority of the United States are
insurrectionary or revolutionary, according to
circumstances.

I therefore consider that in view of the Constitution
and the laws the Union is unbroken, and to the extent of
my ability, I shall take care, as the Constitution itself
expressly enjoins upon me, that the laws of the Union be
faithfully executed in all the States...

In doing this there needs to be no bloodshed or
violence, and there shall be none unless it be forced
upon the national authority. The power confided to
me will be used to hold, occupy, and possess the
property and places belonging to the Government and to
collect the duties and imposts; but beyond what may be
necessary for these objects, there will be no invasion, no
using of force against or among the people anywhere.

Where hostility to the United States in any interior
locality shall be so great and universal as to prevent
competent resident citizens from holding the Federal

125

offices, there will be no attempt to force obnoxious

50 strangers among the people for that object. While the

strict legal right may exist in the Government to enforce
the exercise of these offices, the attempt to do so would
be so irritating and so nearly impracticable withal that I
deem it better to forego for the time the uses of such

55 offices.

Which choice provides the best support for
Lincoln’s claim that the Union must be preserved
as a whole?

A) Lines 29-31! (“acts...revolutionary ”’)

B) Lines 35-37 (“I shall...States”)

C) Lines 40-42 (“The power...Government’”)
D) Lines 46-50 (“Where... object”)

--- PAGE 125 ---
3.

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

The following passage is adapted from Olympe de
Gouges, Declaration of the Rights of Women. It was
initially published in 1791, during the French Revolution,
and was written in response to the Declaration of the
Rights of Man (1789).

Woman, wake up; the toxin of reason is being
heard throughout the whole universe; discover your
rights. The powerful empire of nature is no longer
surrounded by prejudice, fanaticism, superstition, and
lies. The flame of truth has dispersed all the clouds of
folly and usurpation. Enslaved man has multiplied his
strength and needs recourse to yours to break his chains.
Having become free, he has become unjust to his
companion. Oh, women, women! When will you cease
to be blind? What advantage have you received from
the Revolution? A more pronounced scorn, a more
marked disdain. In the centuries of corruption you ruled
only over the weakness of men. The reclamation of
your patrimony, based on the wise decrees of nature —
what have you to dread from such a fine undertaking?
Do you fear that our legislators, correctors of that
morality, long ensnared by political practices now out
of date, will only say again to you: women, what is
there in common between you and us? Everything, you
will have to answer. If they persist in their weakness in
putting this hypocrisy in contradiction to their
principles, courageously oppose the force of reason to
the empty pretensions of superiority; unite yourselves
beneath the standards of philosophy; deploy al] the
energy of your character. Regardless of what barriers
confront you, it is in your power to free yourselves; you
have only to want to, Let us pass not to the shocking
tableau of what you have been in society; and since
national education is in question at this moment, let us
see whether our wise legislators will think judiciously
about the education of women.

Women have done more harm than good. Constraint
and dissimulation have been their lot. What force has
robbed them of, ruse returned to them; they had recourse
to all the resources of their charms, and the most
irreproachable persons did not resist them. Poison and
the sword were both subject to them; they commanded
in crime as in fortune. The French government, especially,
depended throughout the centuries on the nocturnal
administrations of women; the cabinet could keep no
secrets as a result of their indiscretions; all have been
subject to the cupidity and ambition of this sex,
formerly contemptible and respected, and since the
revolution, respectable and scorned.

126

45 In this sort of contradictory situation, what remarks
could I not make! J have but a moment to make them,
but this moment will fix the attention of the remotest
posterity. Under the Old Regime, all was vicious,
all was guilty; but could not the amelioration of
50 conditions be perceived even in the substance of
vices? A woman only had to be beautiful or amiable;
when she possessed these two advantages, she saw a
hundred fortunes at her feet. If she did not profit from
them, she had a bizarre character or a rare philosophy
which made her scorn wealth; then she was deemed
to be like a crazy woman. A young, inexperienced
woman, seduced by a man whom she loves, will
abandon her parents to follow him; the ingrate will
leave her after a few years, and the older she has
60 become with him, the more inhuman is his
inconstancy; if she has children, he will likewise
abandon them. If he is rich, he will consider himself
excused from sharing his fortune with his noble victims.
If some involvement binds him to his duties, he will
65 deny them, trusting that the laws will support him.
If he is married, any other obligation loses its rights.
Then what laws remain to extirpate vice all the way to
its root? The law of dividing wealth and public
administration between men and women, It can easily
70 be seen that one who is born into a rich family gains
very much from such equal sharing. But the one born
into a poor family with merit and virtue — what is her
ot? Poverty and opprobrium. If she does not precisely
excel in music or painting, she cannot be admitted to
75 any public function when she has all the capacity for it.

55

Which choice most effectively supports the

author’s claim that women have undermined
their own cause?

A) Lines 40-41 (“the cabinet...indiscretions”)
B) Lines 53-55 (“Tf...wealth”)

C) Lines 59-61 (“the older...inconstancy”)
D) Lines 73-75 (“If...for it”)

--- PAGE 126 ---
AS

ii Sean Mer ce ARMM e SEN Nees

§
g
3

pire encima ner Renta RRS,

Pe Aiea

BSN BORER ADL ALN WAT IAN

%
H

PEREGO LEE REESE LICL LEILA PELE E SI PT EGIL ANE LIS MEA a NEED LOIRE PINE REE

Se Oe a EEE A I AP NO eR IS BY ON EIDE Bi BOLE AES

4. The following passage is adapted from “Makerspaces,
Hackerspaces, and Community Scale Production in
Detroit and Beyond,” © 2013 by Sean Ansanelli.

During the mid-1980s, spaces began to emerge
across Europe where computer hackers could convene
for mutual support and camaraderie. In the past few
years, the idea of fostering such shared, physical spaces

5 has been rapidly adapted by the diverse and growing
community of “makers,” who seek to apply the idea of
“hacking” to physical objects, processes, or anything
else that can be deciphered and improved upon.

A hackerspace is described by hackerspaces.org as

10 a “community-operated physical space where people
with common interests, often in computers, technology,
science, digital art or electronic art, can meet, socialize,
and/or collaborate.” Such spaces can vary in size,
available technology, and membership structure (some

15 being completely open), but generally share community-
oriented characteristics. Indeed, while the term
“hacker” can sometimes have negative connotations,
modern hackerspaces thrive off of community,
openness, and assimilating diverse viewpoints — these

20 often being the only guiding principles in otherwise
informal organizational structures.

In recent years, the city of Detroit has emerged
as a hotbed for hackerspaces and other DIY
(“Do-It-Yourself”) experiments, Several hackerspaces

25 can already be found throughout the city and several
more are currently in formation. Of course, Detroit’s
attractiveness for such projects can be partially
attributed to cheap real estate, which allows aspiring
hackers to acquire ample space for experimentation.

30 Some observers have also described this kind of making
and tinkering as embedded in the DNA of Detroit’s
residents, who are able to harness substantial
intergenerational knowledge and attract like-minded
individuals.

35 Hackerspaces (or “makerspaces”) can be found in
more commercial forms, but the vast majority of spaces
are self-organized and not-for-profit. For example, the
OmniCorp hackerspace operates off member fees to
cover rent and new equipment, from laser cutters to

40 welding tools. OmniCorp also hosts an “open hack
night” every Thursday in which the space is open to
the general public. Potential members are required to
attend at least one open hack night prior to a consensus
vote by the existing members for admittance; no

45 prospective members have yet been denied.

A visit to one of OmniCorp’s open hack nights
reveals the vast variety of activity and energy existing
in the space. In the main common room alone, activities
range from experimenting with sound installations and

127

50 learning to program Arduino boards to building
speculative “oloid” shapes — all just for the sake of it.
With a general atmosphere of mutual support,
participants in the space are continually encouraged
to help others.

55 One of the most active community-focused initiatives
in the city is the Mt. Elliot Makerspace. Jeff Sturges,
former MIT Media Lab Fellow and Co-Founder of
OmniCorp, started the Mt. Elliot project with the aim of
replicating MIT’s Fab Lab model on a smaller, cheaper

60 scale in Detroit. “Fab Labs” are production facilities that
consist of a small collection of flexible computer-
controlled tools that cover several different scales and
various materials, with the aim to make “almost
anything” (including other machines). The Mt. Elliot

65 Makerspace now offers youth-based skill development
programs in eight areas: Transportation, Electronics,
Digital Tools, Wearables, Design and Fabrication, Food,
Music, and Arts. The range of activities is meant to
provide not only something for everyone, but a well-

70 rounded base knowledge of making to all participants.

While the center receives some foundational support,
the space also derives significant support from the local
community. Makerspaces throughout the city connect
the space’s youth-based programming directly to

75 school curriculums.

The growing interest in and development of
hacker/makerspaces has been explained, in part, as a
result of the growing maker movement. Through the
combination of cultural norms and communication

80 channels from open source production as well as
increasingly available technologies for physical
production, amateur maker communities have developed
in virtual and physical spaces.

Which choice best supports the author’s claim
that hackerspaces are generally welcoming and
tolerant organizations?

A) Lines 24-26 (“Several...formation’’)
B) Lines 44-45 (“no...denied”)
C) Lines 48-51 (“In...shapes”)
D) Lines 71-73 (“While...community”)

--- PAGE 127 ---
10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

The following passage is adapted from “The Origin of the
Ocean Floor” by Peter Keleman, © 2009 by The National
Geographic Society.

At the dark bottom of our cool oceans, 85 percent
of the earth's volcanic eruptions proceed virtually
unnoticed. Though unseen, they are hardly
insignificant. Submarine volcanoes generate the solid
underpinnings of all the world’s oceans massive slabs
of rock seven kilometers thick.

Geophysicists first began to appreciate the
smoldering origins of the land under the sea, known
formally as ocean crust, in the early 1960s. Sonar
surveys revealed that volcanoes form nearly continuous
ridges that wind around the globe like seams ona
baseball. Later, the same scientists strove to explain
what fuels these erupting mountain ranges, called mid-
ocean ridges. Basic theories suggest that because ocean
crust pulls apart along the ridges, hot material deep

within the earth’s rocky interior roust rise to fill the gap.

But details of exactly where the Java originates and
how it travels to the surface long remained a mystery.
In recent years mathematical models of the
interaction between molten and solid rock have
provided some answers, as have examinations of
blocks of old seafloor now exposed on the continents.
These insights made it possible to develop a detailed
theory describing the birth of ocean crust. The process
turns out to be quite different from the typical
layperson's idea, in which fiery magma fills an
enormous chamber underneath a volcano, then rages
upward along a jagged crack. Instead the process
begins dozens of kilometers under the seafloor, where
tiny droplets of melted rock ooze through microscopic
pores at a rate of about 10 centimeters a year, about
as fast as fingernails grow.

Closer to the surface, the process speeds up,
culminating with massive streams of lava pouring
over the seafloor with the velocity of a speeding truck.
Deciphering how liquid moves through solid rock
deep underground not only explains how ocean crust
emerges but also may elucidate the behavior of other
fluid-transport networks, including the river systems
that dissect the planet’s surface.

Far below the mid-ocean ridge volcanoes and their
countless layers of crust-forming lava is the mantle,

a 3,200-kilometer-thick layer of scorching hot rock
that forms the earth’s midsection and surrounds its
metallic core. At the planet’s cool surface, upthrusted
mantle rocks are dark green, but if you could see
them in their rightful home, they would be glowing
red- or even white-hot. The top of the mantle is about
1,300 degrees Celsius, and it gets about one degree

128

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

8&5

hotter with each kilometer of depth. The weight of
overlying rock means the pressure also increases
with depth about | ,000 atmospheres for every three
kilometers.

Knowledge of the intense heat and pressure in
the mantle led researchers to hypothesize in the late
1960s that ocean crust originates as tiny amounts
of liquid rock known as melt almost as though the
solid rocks were “sweating.” Even a minuscule
release of pressure (because of material rising from
its original position) causes melt to form in
microscopic pores deep within the mantle rock.

Explaining how the rock sweat gets to the
surface was more difficult. Melt is less dense than
the mantle rocks in which it forms, so it will
constantly try to migrate upward, toward regions of
lower pressure. But what laboratory experiments
revealed about the chemical composition of melt
did not seem to match up with the composition of
rock samples collected from the mid-ocean ridges,

where erupted melt hardens.

Using specialized equipment to heat and squeeze
crystals from mantle rocks in the laboratory,
investigators learned that the chemical composition
of melt in the mantle varies depending on the depth
at which it forms; the composition is controlled by
an exchange of atoms between the melt and the
minerals that make up the solid rock it passes through.
The experiments revealed that as melt rises, it
dissolves one kind of mineral, orthopyroxene, and
precipitates, or leaves behind, another mineral,
olivine. Researchers could thus infer that the higher
in the mantle melt formed, the more orthopyroxene
it would dissolve, and the more olivine it would
leave behind. Comparing these experimental findings
with lava samples from the mid-ocean ridges
revealed that almost all of them have the composition
of melts that formed at depths greater than 45
kilometers.

A student states that the ocean crust is formed by
explosive volcanic eruptions. Is the student correct
or incorrect, and which lines provide the best
support?

A) Correct, lines 14-16 (“Basic...gap”)

B) Correct, lines 26-28 (‘‘fiery...crack”)

C) Incorrect, lines 30-33 (“tiny... grow”)
D) Incorrect, lines 45-48 (“At... white-hot’)

--- PAGE 128 ---
@
i
t
t
i
t

EMA a WAR I a BO HRA MEM ILEBL BLE ARIE SRG REI IRIE IEA TY AM

APRA ry pole ONE ENE LONE 60 SHE

Explanations: Supporting and Contradicting Claims Exercises

1.1C

Since the question does not provide a line reference and is sufficiently detail-based that you are
unlikely to remember the answer, start by plugging in the line reference. You're looking for a
section that discusses challenges to “sharing-based” companies. A) is incorrect because although
lines 5-7 discuss examples of sharing-based companies, they focus on the likelihood that people
will continue to use them after a single experience; challenges from traditional companies are not
mentioned. Be careful with B). The word rival might suggest competition to you, but in fact this
section is discussing the opposite: Avis is an example of a traditional company that is getting
involved in the sharing economy, not opposing it. C) is correct because lines 27-29 provide a clear
example of an instance in which existing taxi companies successfully opposed “peer-to-peer”
ride-share companies. D) is incorrect because lines 32-34 have nothing to do with challenges by
traditional companies; the author simply voices his opinion regarding regulation.

2.1A

The question essentially asks you to find support for the point of the passage, so it isn’t
immediately clear where in the passage the answer is most likely to be located. If you work in
order, though, you'll hit on the answer right away ~ provided that you back up and get the full
context. The key to identifying A) as the answer is to look at the beginning of the paragraph: It
follows from these views that no State upon its own mere motion can lawfully get out of the Union. Lines
29-31 are used to support this idea. In fact, they are part of the same sentence. A) is thus correct.

3.1A

If you don’t happen to remember where de Gouges discusses how women have undermined
their own cause, the easiest way to find the answer is to skim topic sentences. The information is
presented so clearly that this approach is actually a more efficient strategy for finding the answer
than is plugging in each choice. In line 32, de Gouges clearly states that Women have done more
harnt than good, suggesting that the correct set of lines is most likely located nearby. A) contains
the only line reference in that paragraph, so check it first because it will almost certainly be used
to support that idea. Indeed, lines 40-41 provide a clear example of how women have hurt
themselves, indicating that the cabinet (that is, the French government) could keep no secrets as a
result of their indiscretions,

4.1B

The correct answer must support the idea that hackerspaces “are generally welcoming and
tolerant organizations,” so plug in each set of lines and see whether it fits. A) is incorrect because
lines 24-26 only indicate that hackerspaces can be found throughout Detroit; there’s no
information about whether they’re welcoming or not, and you can’t infer that information from
those lines. B) is correct because the statement that no prospective members have yet been denied
directly implies that makerspaces are pretty relaxed about whom they allow to join. C) is
incorrect because lines 48-51 provide no information about makerspaces’ atmosphere; they only
indicate what people actually do at makerspaces. D) is incorrect because lines 71-73 only indicate
that makerspaces are supported by the community. Again, there is no information about whether
makerspaces are welcoming.

129

--- PAGE 129 ---
5.1C

The key to answering this question is to be aware of the “old idea/new idea” structure, because
that is exactly what this question targets. The third paragraph indicates that the typical layperson’s
idea of how ocean crust forms revolves around a massive underwater explosion. That's the wrong
idea, In line 28, the word Instead signals the transition to the correct explanation: tiny droplets of
melted rock ooze up at an incredibly slow rate. That information indicates that the student's
statement is incorrect, so the answer is C),

If you haven't clued into that information while reading the passage and plug in the answers
individually, you run a serious risk of falling into the trap in B). That answer cites the lines
describing what people typically believe, but the phrase fle typical lnyperson’s idea isn’t included
in the line reference. If you miss that information, you could easily think that the information in
B) describes what actually occurs rather than a mistaken understanding of the phenomenon. A) is
incorrect because lines 14-16 only state that hot material within the earth rises to the surface, but
they do not explain low that occurs. D) is incorrect because lines 45-48 only describe the rocks
before they rise to the surface - they say nothing about how that change takes place.

130

--- PAGE 130 ---
AWA EMO SDNOOMEAR dod

Ase nba sions a nate

YD PONSA GORE AE NEE BAS TNO PD EEIEN AREA 5 AER LER NIPYGA SG MLN ID” SIMIRAI: MBB LES

ng ONS ESET

Literal Comprehension:
Same Idea, Different Words

Literal comprehension questions ask you to identify what a passage states or indicates.
They can be phrased in the following ways:

¢ The author's discussion of antibiotics indicates that...
¢ The author states that which of the following is a longstanding tradition?

* According to the passage, Wang’s experiment produced what result?

These most straightforward and common Reading questions essentially require you to
understand ideas well enough to recognize accurate summaries of them. When you read my
example of the typical, long-winded response many students give when asked to summarize
the main point of a passage (p. 84), you might have laughed, but the truth is that the ability
to pick out the most important ideas in a piece of writing and condense them into a concise,
direct statement is a crucial skill both for the SAT and school.

Because this is the SAT, however, those summaries will rarely use the exact same wording as
that found in the passage. That would just be too easy. The test is whether you understand
the ideas well enough to recognize when they’re stated using different, often more
general, language. Correct answers thus require you to recognize paraphrased versions of
ideas, ones that contain synonyms for key words in the passage. If you understand the idea,
you ll probably be fine; if you're too focused on the details, you might miss it completely.

Most literal comprehension questions will be followed by supporting evidence questions,
and will not contain line references. In general, you should use the line references in the
supporting evidence question to narrow down the location of the answer to the preceding,
literal comprehension question.

Although these questions are asked in a very straightforward way, they can also be
challenging. In addition to having to check multiple locations in the passage for the answer,
you must sometimes navigate very challenging syntax and vocabulary. Furthermore, you
must connect the specific words of the correct set of lines to the more abstract language of
the answers.

We're going to start by looking at some examples of literal comprehension questions. The
first one is quite a bit shorter than what you'll encounter on the SAT, but it’s useful to
illustrate a point.

131

--- PAGE 131 ---
This passage indicates that theoretical physicists’
primary goal is to

Experimental scientists occupy themselves with

observing and measuring the cosmos, finding out
what stuff exists, no matter how strange that stuff
may be. Theoretical physicists, on the other hand, are

5 not satisfied with observing the universe. They want to
know why. They want to explain all the properties of
the universe in terms of a few fundamental principles
and parameters. These fundamental principles, in turn,
lead to the “laws of nature,” which govern the behavior

10 of all matter and energy.

A) identify all of the objects that exist in the
universe.

B) learn to control the laws of nature.
C) understand the universe at its most basic level.
D) observe the cosmos in great detail.

The first thing that you probably notice when you look at the answer choices is that pretty
much all of them contain bits and pieces of ideas mentioned in the passage. The question,
however, is asking you not to identify words or phrases from the passage but rather to make
a small leap from the specific words used in the passage to the rephrased idea.

In this case, the author begins to discuss theoretical physicists in line 4. What do we learn
about these people? That they want to know why. They want to explain all the properties of the
universe in terns of a few fundamental principles and parameters. The key here is to understand
that fundamental means something like “basic” or “essential.” The sentence is saying that
theoretical physicists want to explain how the universe works at its deepest underlying level.

And that is exactly what C) says. Same idea, different words.

Let's look at another example. It’s from a speech by Daniel Webster, delivered shortly before
the Civil War.

I wish to speak to-day, not as a Massachusetts leg -
man, nor as a Northern man, but as an American, and
a member of the Senate of the United States. It is
fortunate that there is a Senate of the United States; a
5 body not yet moved from its propriety, not lost to a just
sense of its own dignity and its own high responsibilities,
and a body to which the country looks, with confidence,
for wise, moderate, patriotic, and healing counsels.
It is not to be denied that we live in the midst of strong
10 agitations, and are surrounded by very considerable
dangers to our institutions and government.

According to Webster, which statement about the
Senate is true?

A) Its role has begun to shift in recent years.
B) It may not survive the threat to its existence,
C) It remains fully aware of of its obligations.

D) It underestimates the challenges faced by the
United States.

In this case, the key phrase is found in lines 5-6, where Webster describes the Senate as a
body (organization) not yet moved from its propriety, not lost to a just sense of its own dignity and
its own high responsibilities. In other words, despite all of the conflicts swirling around, the
Senate retains a full understanding of its position and duties, i.e., if rentains fully aware of its
obligations. C) is thus correct.

On the next page, we're going look at a literal comprehension question paired with a
supporting evidence question. We'll start with a set in which the first question contains a
line reference since that setup is a bit more straightforward.

132

--- PAGE 132 ---
CAEN A POTEET eg SA

3
g
i
5
53

:
%
e
é
§
:
:

5
g
$
i
¢
3
4
€
:
é
f
3
b
{
3
§
*
é
[
:
3
E
i
i
3
4
£

AVALOS EE ee INN Oa NY"

" taeaiieeeds iaiinee dee eae ileal

This passage is adapted from from Kristin Sainani, "What,
Me Worry?” © 2014, Stanford Magazine.

According to a 2013 national survey by the
American Psychological Association, the average
stress level among adults is 5.1 on a scale of 10;
that’s one and a half points above what the
respondents judged to be healthy. Two-thirds of people
say managing stress is important, and nearly that
proportion had attempted to reduce their stress in the
previous five years. Yet only a little over a third say
they succeeded at doing so. More discouraging, teens

10 and young adults are experiencing higher levels of

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

stress, and also are struggling to manage it.

“Stress has a very bad reputation. It’s in pretty bad
shape, PR-wise,” acknowledges Firdaus Dhabhar, an
associate professor of psychiatry and behavioral science
at Stanford. “And justifiably so,” he adds.

Much of what we know about the physical and
mental tol] of chronic stress stems from seminal work
by Robert Sapolsky beginning in the late 1970s.
Sapolsky, a neuroendocrinologist, was among the first
to make the connection that the hormones released
during the fight-or-flight response—the ones that
helped our ancestors avoid becoming dinner—have
deleterious effects when the stress is severe and
sustained. Especially insidious, chronic exposure to
one of these hormones, cortisol, causes brain changes
that make it increasingly difficult to shut the stress
response down.

But take heart: Recent research paints a different
portrait of stress, one in which it indeed has a positive
side. “There’s good stress, there’s tolerable stress,
and there’s toxic stress,” says Bruce McEwen of
Rockefeller University, an expert on stress and the
brain who trained both Sapolsky and Dhabhar.

Situations we typically perceive as stressful—a
confrontation with a co-worker, the pressure to
perform, a to-do list that’s too long—are not the toxic
type of stress that’s been linked to serious health
issues such as cardiovascular disease, autoimmune
disorders, severe depression and cognitive impairment.
Short bouts of this sort of everyday stress can actually
be a good thing: Just think of the exhilaration of
the deadline met or the presentation crushed, the
triumph of holding it all together. And, perhaps not
surprisingly, it turns out that beating yourself up about
being stressed is counterproductive, as worrying about
the negative consequences can in itself exacerbate any
ill effects.

133

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

8&5

90

When Dhabhar was starting his graduate work in
McEwen’s lab in the early 1990s, “the absolutely
overwhelming dogma was that stress suppresses
immunity.” But this didn’t make sense to him from an
evolutionary perspective. If a lion is chasing you, he
reasoned, your immune system should be ramping up,
readying itself to heal torn flesh. [t occurred to Dhabhar
that the effects of acute stress, which lasts minutes to
hours, might differ from the effects of chronic stress,
which lasts days to years.

Dhabhar likens the body’s immune cells to soldiers.
Because their levels in the blood plummet during acute
stress, ‘people used to say: ‘See, stress is bad for you;
your immune system’s depressed,’” he says. “But most
immune battles are not going to be fought in the blood.”
He suspected that the immune cells were instead
traveling to the body’s “battlefields” —sites most likely
to be wounded in an attack, like the skin, gut and Jungs.
In studies where rats were briefly confined (a short-term
stressor), he showed that after an initial surge of immune
cells into the bloodstream, they quickly exited the blood
and took up positions precisely where he predicted they
would.

“His work was a pioneering demonstration of how
important the difference is between acute and chronic
stress,” says Sapolsky, a professor of biology,
neurology, and neurological sciences and neurosurgery.
“Overwhelmingly, the bad health effects of stress are
those of chronic stress.”

This strategic deployment of immune cells can speed
wound healing, enhance vaccine effectiveness and
potentially fight cancer. In 2009, Dhabhar’s team
showed that knee surgery patients with robust immune
redistribution following the stress of surgery recovered
significantly faster and had better knee function a year
later than those with a more sluggish mobilization. In
other studies, volunteers who exercised or took a math
test (both acute stressors) immediately prior to being
vaccinated had a heightened antibody response relative
to volunteers who sat quietly. And in 2010, the
researchers curbed the development of skin cancer in
UV-exposed mice by stressing them before their
sunlamp sessions. Dhabhar speculates that giving
cancer patients low-dose injections of stress
hormones might help prime their immune systems to
fight the cancer. “It may not work out, but if it did,
the benefits could be tremendous,” he says.

--- PAGE 133 ---
Based on the passage, research indicates that
long-term stress (line 17)

A) inhibits the production of cortisol.

B) can create a sense of excitement.

C) becomes progressively harder to reduce.
D) produces a heightened antibody response.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 9-11 (“teens... manage it”)
B) Lines 24-27 (“Especially...down’’)
C) Lines 41-42 (“Just...crushed”)

D) Lines 52-53 (“Tf...ramping up”)

We're going to start by thinking about what the passage tells us about chronic stress, Before
we even reread anything, we can make some assumptions.

First, we know that the passage is about the benefits of aciite stress (“new idea”), and that the
author’s attitude toward that phenomenon is positive.

We also know that long-term stress (i.e., chronic stress, on which “old ideas” about stress are
based) is the opposite of acute stress, and that the author's attitude toward long-term stress is
therefore negative. As a result, we can assume that the correct answer to Question #1 will be
negative as well,

B) is clearly positive: creating a “sense of excitement” is something that acute stress can do,
not chronic stress. Don’t get fooled by this choice.

If you know something about biology, you might also be able to eliminate D). The body
produces antibodies to help it fight infection - that’s a good thing. So D) doesn’t make sense
either. This is a good example of an instance in which outside knowledge is helpful.

Now, having narrowed the possible answers to A) and C), we’re going to shift gears a bit and
approach this pair of questions from a slightly different angle. Let’s start by thinking about
where in the passage the correct lines are most likely located. The reference to line 17 in
Question #1 suggests that the answer to that question is probably found relatively close to the
beginning of the passage. In addition, chronic stress = old idea, and “old ideas” are typically
discussed first. Because the lines referenced in A) and B) of Question #2 are closest to the
beginning, they’re our top contenders for the right answer.

With that in mind, we're going to check each set of line references in Question #2, paying

particular attention to those cited in A) and B), and keeping in mind that the correct answer
must support the idea that chronic stress = bad.

134

--- PAGE 134 ---
£
i
&
&
=
s
&
g
%
2
%
é

PN PRMD RUSS ACESS nei in SUOM TE MBM AREER SUNLESS

4
:
;
:

pa LON eH at

RO ny Sih Nod NE

SER LRA NBA A EH Ae BONA VERE ROWE Eo LIT ANI ACEP AEGEAN MSE ACEI EME SEI ices TINGE Ag SETA

Lines referenced in Question #2:

A) teens and young adults are experiencing higher levels of stress, and also are struggling
to manage it. (lines 9-11)

No. This answer is negative, but it is completely unrelated to either A) or C) in Question #1.

B) Especially insidious, chronic exposure to one of these hormones, cortisol, causes brain
changes that make it increasingly difficult to shut the stress response down. (lines 24-27)

Yes, this makes sense. Chronic is a synonym for long-term, and if you need confirmation, the
beginning of the paragraph uses the phrase chronic stress, This, however, is where you need
to be careful. If you spot the word cortisol and jump to pick A) in Question #1, you'll get in
trouble. The lines above indicate that chronic stress leads to the production of cortisol
(cortisol causes brain changes), whereas A) in Question #1 states that chronic stress inhibits
(shuts down) cortisol production. Right hormone, wrong idea.

That leaves C) in Question #1. Why is that answer correct? The passage states that cortisol
make[s] it increasingly difficult (=progressively harder) to stop the body from responding to
stress. In other words, the more chronically stressed you are, the more cortisol you produce,
which in turn makes it even harder for your body to calm down, i.e., to reduce stress.

If you want to stop there, you can, but if you feel compelled to check the other answers, you
can do so as well. Just don’t spend too much time on them.

C) Just think of the exhilaration of the deadline met or the presentation crushed. (lines 41-42)

The “trick” answer. If you hadn’t thought through the question upfront and determined that
the correct answer had to be negative, you could easily - and incorrectly - assume that these
lines supported B) in Question #1,

D) Ifa lion is chasing you...your immune system should be ramping up. (lines 52-53)

Again, careful. These lines refer to acute stress, not chronic stress. If you didn’t make that
distinction, however, you could potentially try to stretch this answer into a justification for
B) in Question #1 as well.

So that leaves us with B), the correct answer to Question #2.

Important: If you’re a very strong reader able to keep track of things easily, you can start
with the answers closest to the original line reference, but otherwise you should work in
order. If, however, the lines that you used to determine the answer to the first question
appear as an answer to the second question, you can simply select that answer and move on.
If you answer the first question as you read, you should also mark the lines you used to
answer it so that you don’t have to spend time finding them again.

At this point, we’re going to use the same passage and look at a question pair without a line
reference in the first question.

135

--- PAGE 135 ---
Based on information in the passage, acute stress
has which physical effect?

A) It stimulates an immune response in vulnerable
areas of the body.

B) It forces cortisol to collect in the bloodstream.

C) It produces an antibody response more powerful
than that produced by exercise.

D) It cause the body’s natural defenses to weaken.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 24-27 (“chronic...down’’)

B) Lines 45-47 (“worrying...effects”)
C) Lines 63-65 (“immune...Jungs”)

D) Lines 84-87 (“volunteers...quietly’”’)

The first thing we’re going to do is plug the second set of answer choices into the first
question so that we get this:

Based on information in the passage, acute stress
has which physical effect?

A) Lines 24-27 (“chronic...down’”)

B) Lines 45-47 (“worrying...effects”)

C) Lines 63-65 (“immune...lungs”)

D) Lines 84-87 (“volunteers...quietly”)

Now we have something concrete to work with. Instead of just randomly skimming the
passage looking for bits that seem as if they might be relevant, we’ve narrowed our focus to
four specific places to look for the answer.

The next step is to check each answer. The key phrase in the question is “acute stress,” so the
correct answer must be related to that phenomenon.

If you find that doing so helps you, you can bracket off each line reference in the text, either

before you start working through the answers or as you come to each one. Just remember
that you may need to skim the surrounding lines for context.

136

--- PAGE 136 ---
3
&
&
3
Z
Z
g
i
i
5
3
i
:
Fs
5
%
i
i
d
}
i
i
i
ig
f
i
i
j
:

g

Based on information in the passage, acute stress i
has which physical effect?

A)

B)
C)

D)

A) chronic exposure to one of these hormones, cortisol, causes brain changes that make it
increasingly difficult to shut the stress response down.

Be very, very careful here. This statement might seem to support B) in Question #1, but the
end of the previous statement indicates that cortisol is a result of stress that is sustained, ie.,
chronic, whereas the question asks about acute stress. So these lines are actually off-topic.

B) worrying about the negative consequences can in itself exacerbate any ill effects.

These lines are essentially saying that worrying about stress can make people more stressed
out. This answer is also off-topic because the lines don’t specifically discuss acute stress.

C) immune cells were instead traveling to the body’s “battlefields” — sites most likely to be
wounded in an attack, like the skin, gut, and lungs.

In order to determine whether this statement answers the question, you need to back up and
obtain some context. In some cases you will only need to back up a sentence or two, but here
you need to go all the way back to the end of the previous paragraph. Lines 54-57 indicate
that Dhabhar made this hypothesis in the context of a study designed to determine whether
acute stress could have positive effects. So this section is talking about the right type of
stress. In addition, lines 66-70 indicate that Dhabhar’s experiment confirmed his hypothesis,
so the statement in question does in fact describe an effect of acute stress.

D) volunteers who exercised or took a math test (both acute stressors) immediately prior to
being vaccinated had a heightened antibody response relative to volunteers who sat quietly.

Clearly, this answer discusses the effects of acute stress as well, so it’s also a contender.

Now we're going to backtrack and see which of the statements in the previous question is
directly supported by either C) or D).

It stimulates an immune response in vulnerable
areas of the body.
It forces cortisol to collect in the bloodstream.

It produces an antibody response more
powerful than that produced by exercise.

It cause the body’s natural defenses to weaken.

C) in Question #2 is consistent with A) in Question #1 above): sites most likely to be wounded
in at attack = vulnerable areas of the body. A) also rephrases the passage - a good sign.

D) in Question #2 is a little trickier. Although lines 84-87 do indicate that acute stress
produced a heightened antibody response, they do not indicate that the response was “more
powerful” than it was after exercise. It could be true, but we don’t have enough information.

A) is thus the correct answer to Question #1, and C) is the correct answer to Question #2.

137

--- PAGE 137 ---
Other Approaches

If you're a strong reader and/or excel at playing process of elimination, you'll probably find
that you don’t always need - or want - to look back at the passage for the first question in a
supporting evidence pair.

You might also find the strategy discussed above too complicated, preferring to look back at
the passage and then answer the questions in order, I do not generally advocate this strategy
since line references constitute such an important source of information, But that said, it may
make sense to approach certain individual questions this way. You should, however, be
aware that a major pitfall of ignoring line references initially is that the information you need
to answer the first question might not appear until close to the end of a (long) passage. If you
begin to panic halfway through because you haven't found the answer yet, you can easily
fall into a loop of skimming randomly and guessing.

Otherwise, when you either remember the answer to the first question or are able to figure it
out logically by using the main point or eliminating answers, you may also find yourself a
bit irritated by the supporting evidence question. You understand the gist of the passage and
just know what the right answer is. Why should you have to go and find support for
something that seems so obvious?

As far as problems go, this is a pretty good one to have. If you're a strong enough reader to
figure out the point on your own and identify the correct answer based on it, you're
probably a strong enough reader to figure out what sort of information is consistent with it.
All you have to do is look through the line references and pick out the one that fits.

In other cases, however, working by process of elimination might allow you to eliminate an
option or two but not identify the correct answer with certainty. For instance, let’s reconsider
the question we just looked at on the previous page. If you work from the understanding
that acute stress = good, you might be able to cross out D) because that answer is clearly
negative. And if you happen to remember that cortisol is associated with chronic rather than
acute stress, you might also be able to eliminate B). But then you're left with A) and C), What
do you do?

At that point, you want to think logically about where the necessary information is most
likely to be located. Benefits of acute stress = new idea. “New ideas” tend to be discussed
after “old ideas”, so you can make an educated guess that the correct lines will appear
somewhere in the second half of the passage. As a result, you can check C) and D) in
Question #2 first. If you read carefully and establish the context for those lines, you
shouldn’t have too much trouble connecting C) in Question #2 to A) in Question #1. Even if
you're uncertain about A), you can still play process of elimination: lines 84-87 do not
indicate that the antibody response produced by acute stress is more powerful than that
produced by exercise.

Starting on the next page, we’re going to look at some additional examples.

138

--- PAGE 138 ---
10

i

wn

“THe etc ere ree ey TR WAPI OLGA OHNO enmarastaertramennonnesmeimnterm son

20

25

LAE NSD IMCYOIRR EES

Citrus greening, the plague that could wipe out
Florida's $9 billion orange industry, begins with the
touch of a jumpy brown bug ona sun-kissed leaf.
From there, the bacterial disease incubates in the
tree’s roots, then moves back up the trunk in full force,
causing nutrient flows to seize up. Leaves turn yellow,
and the oranges, deprived of sugars from the leaves,
remain green, sour, and hard. Many fall before harvest,
brown necrotic flesh ringing failed stems.

For the past decade, Florida’s oranges have been
literally starving. Since it first appeared in 2005,
citrus greening, also known by its Chinese name,
huanglongbing, has swept across Florida’s groves
like a flood. With no hills to block it, the Asian citrus
psyllid—the invasive aphid relative that carries the
disease —has infected nearly every orchard in the
state. By one estimate, 80 percent of Florida’s citrus
trees are infected and declining,

The disease has spread beyond Florida to nearly
every orange-growing region in the United States.
Despite many generations of breeding by humanity,
no citrus plant resists greening; it afflicts lemons,
grapefruits, and other citrus species as well. Once a
tree is infected, it will die. Yet in a few select Floridian
orchards, there are now trees that, thanks to innovative
technology, can fight the greening tide.

The pressure to find solutions keeps growing. Even
without disease, the orange industry is under stress.
It’s losing land to housing developments; it’s losing
customers to the spreading notion that orange juice is a
sugary, not healthy, drink.

The citrus industry, slow to prevent the greening
disease, has partially redirected its advertising budget
and invested heavily in research—reportedly $90

35 million so far. Southern Gardens Citrus, one of the

largest growers, supports Mirkov’s work. The federal
government, too, has contributed, with this year's farm
bill directing $125 million toward the fight against
citrus greening.

The passage indicates that citrus greening affects
trees by

A) flooding them with particles of virus.

B) depriving them of key nutrients.

C) destroying the groves where they are planted.
D) altering their genetic structure.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 6-9 (“Leaves...stems”)
B) Lines 14-17 (“With...state”)
C) Lines 21-22 (“Despite... greening”)
D) Lines 29-31 (“It’s losing...drink”)

When you work this way, you should start by identifying/underlining the key word or
phrase that indicates the specific focus of the question. Here, the key phrase is affects trees.

Then, go back to the passage to skim for that idea, remembering to pull your index finger
down the page as you skim and to pay close attention to the introduction, the conclusion,
and the first and last sentences of paragraphs. Even in shorter passages, key information is
most likely to be located in those places.

To reiterate: if you decide to skim the passage for the key information and do not have a
clear idea of where that information is, it is crucial that you cover the entire passage. One
very common mistake students make is to assume that the necessary information must be
buried somewhere in the middle of the passage. Consequently, they skip the beginning and
start searching from the second or third paragraph, with the result that they never find what
they're looking for - and that’s a shame since the answer is often quite straightforward.

That is precisely the case here: the information you need is located in the introduction. The
phrase begins with the touch of a jumpy brown bug on a sun-kissed leaf indicates that the author is
about to launch into a description of citrus greening’s effects on trees. The statement that
{citrus greening causes] nutrient flows to seize up points you directly to B) in Question #1.

139

--- PAGE 139 ---
According to the author’s description, citrus
greening could best be described as

A) mysterious.
B) benign.
C) ancient,
D) devastating.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 17-18 (“By...declining”)
B) Lines 24-26 (“Yet...tide’”)

C) Lines 29-31 (“It’s...drink’’)

D) Lines 32-35 (“The citrus...far”)

Notice, however, that that phrase does not appear in any of the sets of line references in
Question #2. Instead, the correct answer to Question #2, A), cites lines that support or
expand on the point by describing how leaves dry up when they are deprived of sugar. In
this case, that is not a major issue because A) includes the only set of lines to appear in the
introduction ~ a placement that immediately suggests that it is the answer.

In general, though, if you choose to answer paired supporting evidence questions in order,
it is a good idea to bracket off the lines you used to determine the answer to the first
question. If they happen to be cited in one of the answers to the second question, you have
the answers to both questions. And even if the exact lines on which you based your answer
aren’t cited, there’s a good chance that the correct set of lines will appear right nearby.

The answer to the questions we just looked at were based on an easily overlooked detail.
Without a truly exceptional memory, most readers would have to return to the passage to
answer them. In other cases, however, you may be able to use a big-picture understanding of
the passage to answer the first question quickly. You can then check each set of lines against
the idea you know it must contain.

Let's look at an example based on the same passage:

Question #1 could actually be considered a vocabulary question in reverse. Instead of
identifying the meaning of a specific word in the passage, you must use the wording of the
passage to identify the correct definition from among the answer choices.

Although the question does not provide a line reference, there is no need to go searching
through the passage for the answer. If you're gotten the gist of the passage, you can pretty
much answer it on your own. What's the point? CG = AWFUL (citrus greening is awful).
Assuming you know the definition of devastating, you can jump to D) right away. Note that
it’s irrelevant whether you know the definitions of the incorrect answers (especially benign)
as long as you know the definition of the correct answer.

140

--- PAGE 140 ---
Note that it’s irrelevant whether you know the definitions of the other words (especially
benign) as long as you do know what devastating means.

Now all you have to do is find the lines that say as much. Since a good part of the passage is
devoted to making the point that citrus greening is devastating, you probably shouldn’t try
to figure out the lines on your own. There are just too many places where they could be
located. Even so, it shouldn't be too hard to work from the answers provided.

A) By one estimate, 80 percent of Florida’s citrus trees are infected and declining.

Yes, this is consistent with the idea that citrus greening is devastating. 80 percent is an
enormous loss. Because this answer fits, you can stop reading right there. If you really
wanted to make sure, you could check the remaining answers, but especially in this case, it’s
not really necessary.

Why? Think about how the passage is organized. Everything up until line 24 is basically
focused on emphasizing how awful the effects of citrus greening are. After line 24, the focus
switches to stopping the disease. Logically, the correct set of lines must appear before line 24.
A) contains the only set of lines to meet that criterion, so it must be correct.

Using Line References to Make Educated Guesses

If you want to get really ambitious, you can occasionally use a word in a line reference to
identify the likely answer to Question #2. This strategy does require close attention to detail
as well as some very logical thinking, but it can also get you to the answer much more
quickly. For example, take another look at this combined question from p. 139.

The passage indicates that citrus greening affects
trees by

A) Lines 7-9 (“Leaves...planet’”)

B) Lines 14-17 (“With...state”)

C) Lines 21-22 (“Despite...greening”)
D) Lines 29-31 (“It’s losing...drink’”)

Notice that Question #1 asks about the effect on trees. If you start with that information and
very, very carefully consider the words at the beginnings and ends of line references in
Question #2, you can make an educated guess,

Which answer includes a word related to the trees? Choice A), which contains the word
leaves. That one, tiny clue is enough to suggest that it is worth checking first. And when you
plug this answer in, you can see that it does in fact answer the question.

But to reiterate: you should never choose an answer this way without going back to the
passage and getting the full context. This strategy is only useful insofar as it can occasionally
get you to the correct answer faster. Leaping to conclusions can get you into a lot of trouble
on the SAT - it’s much safer not to risk it.

141

--- PAGE 141 ---
1.

10

i5

20

10

415

20

25

Literal Comprehension Exercises

The world is complex and interconnected, and the
evolution of our communications system from a
broadcast model to a networked one has added a new
dimension to the mix. The Internet has made us all less
dependent on professional journalists and editors for
information about the wider world, allowing us to seek
out information directly via online search or to receive
it from friends through social media. But this enhanced
convenience comes with a considerable risk: that we
will be exposed to what we want to know at the expense
of what we need to know, While we can find virtual
communities that correspond to our every curiosity,
there’s little pushing us beyond our comfort zones
to or into the unknown, even if the unknown may have
serious implications for our lives. There are things we
should probably know more about—like political and
religious conflicts in Russia or basic geography. But even
if we knew more than we do, there’s no guarantee that
the knowledge gained would prompt us to act ina
particularly admirable fashion.

Chimps do it, birds do it, even you and I do it.
Once you see someone yawn, you are compelled to
do the saine. Now it seems that wolves can be added
to the list of animals known to spread yawns like a
contagion.

Among humans, even thinking about yawning can
trigger the reflex, leading some to suspect that catching
a yawn is linked to our ability to empathize with other
humans. For instance, contagious yawning activates the
same parts of the brain that govern empathy and social
know-how. And some studies have shown that humans
with more fine-tuned social skills are more likely to catch
a yawn,

Similarly, chimpanzees, baboons and bonobos
often yawn when they see other members of their species
yawning. Chimps (Pan troglodytes) can catch yawns
from humans, even virtual ones. At least in primates,
contagious yawning seems to require an emotional
connection and may function as a demonstration of
empathy. Beyond primates, though, the trends are less
clear-cut. One study found evidence of contagious
yawning in birds but didn’t connect it to empathy.
A 2008 study showed that dogs (Canis lupus familiaris)
could catch yawns from humans, and another showed
that dogs were more likely to catch the yawn of a familiar
human rather than a stranger. But efforts to see if dogs
catch yawns from each other and to replicate the results
have so far had no luck.

142

The passage indicates that internet users tend to
seek information in a manner that is

A) impulsive.
B) unadventurous.
C) creative.
D) reckless.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 1-4 (“The world...mix’)

B) Lines 4-6 (“The Internet... world”)
C) Line 13 (“there’s...zones”)

D) Lines 17-20 (“But.,.fashion’)

The passage indicates that the people most likely to
catch yawns are

A) detail oriented.

B) easily persuaded.
C) attuned to others,
D) chronically fatigued.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 3-5 (“Now...contagion”)
B) Lines 9-11 (‘For...know-how”)
C) Lines 21-22 (“One...empathy”)
D) Lines 26-28 (“But...fuck”)

--- PAGE 142 ---
The passage indicates that the connection between
empathy and yawning in birds and dogs, in
comparison to humans, is

A) more uncertain.

B) less uncertain.

C) impossible to establish.
D) acontroversial topic.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 3-4 (“Now... yawns”)
B) Lines 14-16 (“Similarly...yawning”)
C) Lines 20-21 (“Beyond...clear-cut”)
i

D) Lines 23-26 (“A 2008...stranger’) i
143

--- PAGE 143 ---
3. The following passage is adapted from George Orwell,
“Keep the Aspidistra Flying," first published in 1936.
Gordon, the protagonist, is a poet.

Gordon walked homeward against the rattling wind,
which blew his hair backward and gave him more of a
‘good’ forehead than ever, His manner conveyed to the
passers-by — at least, he hoped it did—that if he wore

5 no overcoat it was from pure caprice.

Willowbed Road, NW, was dingy and depressing,
although it contrived to keep up a kind of mingy
decency. There was even a dentist’s brass plate on one
of the houses. In quite two-thirds of them, amid the
lace curtains of the parlor window, there was a green
card with ‘Apartments’ on it in silver lettering, above
the peeping foliage of an aspidistra.*

Mrs. Wisbeach, Gordon's landlady, specialized in
‘single gentlemen,’ Bed-sitting-rooms, with gaslight laid
on and find your own heating, baths extra (there was a
geyser), and meals in the tomb-dark dining-room with
the phalanx of clotted sauce-bottles in the middle of
the table. Gordon, who came home for his midday dinner,
paid twenty-seven and six a week.

The gaslight shone yellow through the frosted transom
above the door of Number 31. Gordon took out his key
and fished about in the keyhole — in that kind of house
the key never quite fits the lock. The darkish little
hallway — in reality it was only a passage — smelt of
dishwater and cabbage. Gordon glanced at the japanned
tray on the hall-stand. No letters, of course. He had
told himself not to hope for a letter, and nevertheless
had continued to hope. A stale feeling, not quite a pain,
settled upon his breast. Rosemary might have written!

It was four days now since she had written, Moreover,

he had sent out to magazines and had not yet had returned
to him. The one thing that made the evening bearable

was to find a letter waiting for him when he got home.
But he received very few letters — four or five in a week
at the very most.

On the left of the hall was the never-used parlor,
then came the staircase, and beyond that the passage ran
down to the kitchen and to the unapproachable lair
inhabited by Mrs. Wisbeach herself. As Gordon came in,
the door at the end of the passage opened a foot or so,
Mrs. Wisbeach’s face emerged, inspected him briefly
but suspiciously, and disappeared again. It was quite
impossible to get in or out of the house, at any time
before eleven at night, without being scrutinized in this
45 manner. Just what Mrs. Wisbeach suspected you of it

10

45

20

25

30

35

40

144

was hard to say. She was one of those malignant

respectable women who keep lodging-houses. Age

about forty-five, stout but active, with a pink, fine-
featured, horribly observant face, beautifully grey hair,
50 and a permanent grievance.

In the familiar darkness of his room, Gordon felt for
the gas-jet and lighted it. The room was medium-sized,
not big enough to be curtained into two, but too big to
be sufficiently warmed by one defective oi! lamp. It had

55 the sort of furniture you expect in a top floor back.

White-quilted single-bed; brown lino floor-covering;

wash-hand-stand with jug and basin of that cheap white

ware which you can never see without thinking of
chamberpots. On the window-sill there was a sickly
60 aspidistra in a green-glazed pot.

Up against this, under the window, there was a
kitchen table with an inkstained green cloth. This was
Gordon’s ‘writing’ table. It was only after a bitter
struggle that he had induced Mrs. Wisbeach to give him
a kitchen table instead of the bamboo ‘occasional’
table — a mere stand for the aspidistra - which she
considered proper for a top floor back, And even now
there was endless nagging because Gordon would never
allow his table to be ‘tidied up.’ The table was in a
permanent mess. It was almost covered with a muddle
of papers, perhaps two hundred sheets, grimy and
dog-eared, and all written on and crossed out and written
on again — a sort of sordid labyrinth of papers to which
only Gordon possessed the key. There was a film of
dust over everything. Except for a few books on the
mantelpiece, this table, with its mess of papers, was the
sole mark Gordon’s personality had left on the room.

65

70

75

*a bulbous plant with broad leaves, often used as a
houseplant.

Based on the passage, “that kind of house” (line 22)
is one that is

A) large and rambling.
B) gloomy and rundown.
C) tidy and cheerful.

D) utterly neglected.

--- PAGE 144 ---
Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

; oe |

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?
t

A) Lines 6-8 (“Willowbed...decency”)
B) Lines 9-12 (“In...apidastra”) B) Lines 63-65 (“It was...table”)
C) Lines 18-19 (“Gordon... week’) C) Lines 73-74 (“a sort...key”)
D) Lines 26-28 (“He...hope”) i D) Lines 75-77 (“Except...room’”)

A) Lines 52-55 (“The room...back”)

The passage indicates that the encounter between
Gordon and Mrs. Wisbeach was

: A) inevitable.
i B) drawn out.
C) cordial.

D) unexpected.

;

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 32-33 (“The one...home”)
B) Lines 36-39 (“On... herself”)

C) Lines 42-45 (“It was...manner’)
D) Lines 46-50 (She... grievance”)

; The narrator indicates that the papers in Gordon’s
room were

A) an unrecognized masterpiece.
B) hidden from view.

} C) a source of embarrassment.

; D) comprehensible to Gordon alone.

145

RAE NREL GEL IRON ae ae,

--- PAGE 145 ---
4.

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

The following passage is adapted from Wiebke
Brauer, “The Miracle of Space,” © 2014 by Smart
Magazine.

Imagine a world where you share the available
space with others: without signs, sidewalks, or bicycle
lanes. A vision otherwise known as shared space —
and one that becomes more and more relevant with
the crowding of our cities. While this might sound like
urban science fiction or, possibly, impending chaos
mixed with survival of the fittest, this particular
concept is the declared dream of many traffic planners.

Shared space means streets freed of signs and
signals; streets solely governed by right of way, leaving
road users to their own devices. In order to restructure
public space, it removes all superfluous interventions
and contradictory guidelines. Many countries are
currently in the process of installing — or at least
discussing — such ‘lawless’ areas: Germany and the
Netherlands, Denmark and the UK, Switzerland and
the USA, but also Australia and New Zealand.

One could argue that shared spaces have been
around for a long time, simply under different terms
and titles. Back in the 1970s, for example, residents
enjoyed mixed traffic areas, traffic calming, and play
streets. And yet, these were not quite the same:

Shared space involves a new and radical push for equal
rights of all road users, pedestrian and otherwise. And
while it was British urban designer Ben Hamilton-
Baillie who coined the actual term, the concept itself
was developed in the mid-1990s under former Dutch
traffic manager Hans Monderman. Shortly before his
death in 2006, Monderman explained the basic tenets
of shared space as such: “The problem with traffic
engineers is that when there’s a problem with a road,
they always try to add something. To my mind, it’s
much better to remove things.”

Indeed, studies have shown that in many places —
where signs and traffic lights have been removed and
where each and every one is responsible for their own
actions in ungoverned space — the rate of accidents
goes down. The reason: the traditional strict separation
between cars, cyclists, and pedestrians encourages
clashes at crossings. And although shared space
requires cars to lower their speed, it also cuts down
on journey times since it encourages a continuous
flow of traffic instead of bringing it to a halt through
traffic signals.

Monderman was utterly convinced that shared space
would work anywhere in the world because, underneath
it all, people are basically the same, despite any cultural
differences. In an interview, he stated that “emotions
and issues are the same everywhere. You should be able

146

S50 to read a street like a book. If you insist on
constantly guiding people and treating them like
idiots, you shouldn’t be surprised if they act like
idiots after a while.”

At the same time, the threat of looming idiocy

55 is not the most pressing reason for a future traffic
management rethink. Recent city planning, for
example, has evolved along the same lines around
the world: think highways and flyovers dissecting the
city’s natural fabric, dedicated pedestrian zones, and

60 large shopping malls, Clear-cut boundaries between
driving, work, life, and shopping are emphasized by
a thicket of signs. The result: ultimate, well-ordered
bleakness. At night, you might find yourself in an
empty, soulless pedestrian zone. A lot of the time,

65 urbanization simply translates as uniformity.

In recent years, however, city and traffic planners
have decided to tackle this issue with “road space
attractiveness” measures to breathe new spirit into
lifeless satellite towns. Their goal: a new definition

70 of space and mobility against the background that
the notion of “might is right” — and only if those in
power stick to the rules ~ is more than outdated.
The unregulated and unorthodox approach of shared
space makes it obvious to each and every individual

75 that this concept requires cooperation, that sharing
is the new having.

Critics of Monderman and Hamilton-Baillie
have yoiced that no rules implies the inevitable
return of “might is right.” Yet who says that chaos

80 reigns in the absence of order? That’s a questionable
statement. Shared space certainly requires a new
mindset and we can’t expect a swift shift away from
traditional traffic planning — bigger, further, faster.

But the vision of no more set traffic cycles, fewer

85 linear and predefined patterns, of freely flowing and
intermingling participants in an open and boundless
space, is equally unfettered and fascinating. A vision
in the spirit of Pericles who wrote around 450 BC
that “you need freedom for happiness and courage

90 for freedom.”

The passage indicates that in areas where traffic
signals are removed, traveling becomes

A)
B)
C)
D)

safer and less time consuming.

safer and more time consuming.

more dangerous and less time consuming.
more dangerous and more time consuming.

--- PAGE 146 ---
ident ileal eat ai it Tattle tk

om we

CEN ENNIO ee PES RE My

j
§
g
i
:
i
t
5
é
:

According to the author, recent city planning has
primarily resulted in

A) isolated neighborhoods.
B) alack of variety.

C) stylistic incoherence.
D) urban revitalization.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 13-15 (“Many...areas”)

B) Lines 30-32 (“The problem...things”)
C) Lines 48-49 (“emotions ...everywhere”)
D) Lines 64-65 (“A...uniformity”)

147

--- PAGE 147 ---
5.

10

iS

20

25

30

35

40

This passage is adapted from a 1950 speech by Dean

Acheson, who served as Secretary of State from 1949

to 1953 and strongly influenced United States foreign
policy during the Cold War.

However much we may sympathize with the
Soviet citizens who for reasons bedded deep in history
are obliged to live under it, we are not attempting to
change the governmental or social structure of the Soviet
Union. The Soviet regime, however, has devoted a major
portion of its energies and resources to the attempt to
impose its system on other peoples. In this attempt it
has shown itself prepared to resort to any method or
stratagem, including subversion, threats, and even
military force.

Therefore, if the two systems are to coexist, some
acceptable means must be found to free the world from
the destructive tensions and anxieties of which it has
been the victim in these past years and the continuance
of which can hardly be in the interests of any people.

1 wish, therefore, to speak to you about those points
of greatest difference which must be identified and
sooner or later reconciled if the two systems are to live
together, if not with mutual respect, at least in
reasonable security.

It is now nearly five years since the end of hostilities,
and the victorious Allies have been unable to define the
terms of peace with the defeated countries. This is a
grave, a deeply disturbing fact. For our part, we do not
intend nor wish, in fact we do not know how, to create
satellites. Nor can we accept a settlement which would
make Germany, Japan, or liberated Austria satellites of
the Soviet Union. The experience in Hungary, Rumania,
and Bulgaria has been one of bitter disappointment and
shocking betrayal of the solemn pledges by the wartime
Allies. The Soviet leaders joined in the pledge at Tehran
that they looked forward “with confidence to the day
when all peoples of the world may live free lives,
untouched by tyranny, and according to their varying
desires and their own consciences.” We can accept
treaties of peace which would give reality to this pledge
and to the interests of all in security.

With regard to the whole group of countries which
we are accustomed to thinking of as the satellite area, the
Soviet leaders could withdraw their military and police
force and refrain from using the shadow of that force to
keep in power persons or regimes which do not command
the confidence of the respective peoples, freely expressed
through orderly representative processes.

148

45

50

In this connection, we do not insist that these
governments have any particular political or social
complexion. What concerns us is that they should be
truly independent national regimes, with a will of their
own and with a decent foundation in popular feeling.

The Soviet leaders could cooperate with us to the
end that the official representatives of all countries are
treated everywhere with decency and respect and that
an atmosphere is created in which these representatives
could function in a normal and helpful manner,

55 conforming to the accepted codes of diplomacy.

60

65

70

75

&0

These are some of the things which we feel]
that Soviet leaders could do which would permit the
tational and peaceful development of the coexistence
of their system and ours. They are not things that go to
the depths of the moral conflict. They have been
formulated by us, not as moralists but as servants of
government, anxious to get on with the practical
problems that lie before us and to get on with them in
a manner consistent with mankind’s deep longing for a
respite from fear and uncertainty.

Nor have they been formulated as a one-sided
bargain. A will to achieve binding, peaceful settlements
would be required of all participants. All would have
to produce unmistakable evidence of their good faith.
All would have to accept agreements in the observance
of which all nations could have real confidence.

The United States is ready, as it has been and always
will be, to cooperate in genuine efforts to find peaceful
settlements. Our attitude is not inflexible, our opinions
are not frozen, our positions are not and will not be
obstacles to peace. But it takes more than one to
cooperate. If the Soviet Union could join in doing these
things I have outlined, we could all face the future with
greater security. We could look forward to more than
the eventual reduction of some of the present tensions,
We could anticipate a return to a more normal and
relaxed diplomatic atmosphere and to progress in the
transaction of some of the international business which
needs so urgently to be done.

--- PAGE 148 ---
chen tenner

ehicasent tn stares:

What is the author’s main point about regimes
j in the satellite area?

A) Their leaders are susceptible to outside
influences because they lack confidence.

B) The United States would not dictate their
policies as long as they were elected freely.

C) They should model themselves directly on
successful democracies.

D) They should refrain from behaving
aggressively toward neighboring countries.

5

RONAN gE

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 38-41 (“With...force’”)
B) Lines 45-48 (“In...regimes”)
C) Lines 50-52 (“The Soviet.. respect”)
D) Lines 67-68 (“A will... participants”)

pga a MAEREZ MIRREN Sg

The author uses Hungary, Rumania, and Bulgaria
(lines 28-29) as examples of

Liha OR ai

A) Soviet leaders’ betrayal of their pledge at
Tehran,

B) newly liberated satellites of the Soviet Union.

C) countries that the United States want to
transform into satellites.

D) nations that have expressed the desire to accept
peace treaties.

The author describes the Soviet Union as a regime
characterized by

A) flexibility.
B) corruption.
C) ruthlessness.
D) loyalty.

sander

evhtaiorrs i,

149

2

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 7-10 (“In...force”)

B) Lines 16-19 (“I...together’’)

C) Lines 21-23 (“It is...countries”)

D) Lines 31-34 (“The Soviet.. tyranny”)

--- PAGE 149 ---
6. The following passage is adapted from “Scientists
Discover Salty Aquifer, Previously Unknown Microbial
Habitat Under Antarctica,” © 2015 by Dartmouth College.

Using an airborne imaging system for the first time
in Antarctica, scientists have discovered a vast network

of unfrozen salty groundwater that may support previously

unknown microbial life deep under the coldest, driest

5 desert on our planet. The findings shed new light on
ancient climate change on Earth and provide strong
evidence that a similar briny aquifer could support
microscopic life on Mars. The scientists used SkyTEM,
an airborne electromagnetic sensor, to detect and map

10 otherwise inaccessible subterranean features.

The system uses an antennae suspended beneath
a helicopter to create a magnetic field that reveals the
subsurface to a depth of about |! 000 feet. Because a
helicopter was used, large areas of rugged terrain could

15 be surveyed. The SkyTEM team was funded by the
Nationa! Science Foundation and led by researchers
from the University of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK),
and Dartmouth College, which oversees the NSF’s
SkyTEM project.

20 =“These unfrozen materials appear to be relics of
past surface ecosystems and our findings provide
compelling evidence that they now provide deep
subsurface habitats for microbial life despite extreme
environmental conditions,” says lead author Jill Mikucki,

25 an assistant professor at UTK. “These new below-

ground visualization technologies can also provide insight

on glacial dynamics and how Antarctica responds to
responds to climate change.”
Co-author Dartmouth Professor Ross Virginia is

30 SkyTEM’s co-principal investigator and director of
Dartmouth’s Institute of Arctic Studies. “This project is
studying the past and present climate to, in part,
understand how climate change in the future will affect
biodiversity and ecosystem processes,” Virginia says.

35 “This fantastic new view beneath the surface will help
us sort out competing ideas about how the McMurdo
Dry Valleys have changed with time and how this history
influences what we see today.”

The researchers found that the unfrozen brines form

40 extensive, interconnected aquifers deep beneath glaciers
and lakes and within permanently frozen soils. The
brines extend from the coast to at least 7.5 miles inland
in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, the largest ice-free region
in Antarctica, The brines could be due to freezing and/or

45 deposits. The findings show for the first time that the
Dry Valleys’ lakes are interconnected rather than isolated
connectivity between lakes and aquifers is important in
sustaining ecosystems through drastic climate change,

such as lake dry-down events. The findings also challenge

i

150

50 the assumption that parts of the ice sheets below the
pressure melting point are devoid of liquid water.

In addition to providing answers about the biological
adaptations of previously unknown ecosystems that
persist in the extreme cold and dark of the Antarctic

55 winter, the new study could help scientists to
understand whether similar conditions might exist
elsewhere in the solar system, specifically beneath the
surface of Mars, which has many similarities to the Dry
Valleys. Overall, the Dry Valleys ecosystem — cold,

60 vegetation-free and home only to microscopic animal
and plant life — resembles, during the Antarctic summer,
conditions on the surface on Mars.

SkyTEM produced images of Taylor Valley along
the Ross Sea that suggest briny sediments exist at

65 subsurface temperatures down to perhaps -68°F, which
is considered suitable for microbial life. One of the
studied areas was lower Taylor Glacier, where the data
suggest ancient brine still exists beneath the glacier.
That conclusion is supported by the presence of Blood

70 Falls, an iron-rich brine that seeps out of the glacier and
hosts an active microbial ecosystem.

Scientists’ understanding of Antarctica's
underground environment is changing dramatically as
research reveals that subglacial lakes are widespread

75 and that at least half of the areas covered by the ice
sheet are akin to wetlands on other continents. But
groundwater in the ice-free regions and along the
coastal margins remains poorly understood.

The passage indicates that the “unfrozen salty
groundwater” (line 3) was once

A) contained in isolated lakes.
B) locked in glaciers.
C) devoid of any life.
D) found at the earth’s surface.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 5-6 (“The findings... Earth’)

B) Lines 20-21 (“These...ecosystems”)
C) Lines 31-34 (“This...processes”)

D) Lines 47-48 (“connectivity...change”)

--- PAGE 150 ---
PMN APNEA NI

AEN? MOREE gh m0

‘
i
‘
a
i
{
i
}
i
t

Based on the passage, a novel finding of the
SkyTEM project was that

A) shifting plates below the Antarctic surface can
create major earthquakes.

B) certain regions of Antarctica bear a similarity
to the surface of Mars.

C) interconnected lakes and aquifers create hardy
ecosystems.

D) biodiversity in Antarctica is decreasing rapidly
as a result of climate change. .

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 8-10 (“The scientists. ..features’’)
B) Lines 25-28 (“These...change”)

C) Lines 45-49 (“The findings. ..events”)
D) Lines 75-76 (“at least...continents”)

151

--- PAGE 151 ---
10

45

20

25

30

35

40

45

The following passage is adapted from Jane Austen,
Northanger Abbey, originally published in 1817.

No one who had ever seen Catherine Morland in
her infancy would have supposed her born to be an
heroine. Her situation in life, the character of her father
and mother, her own person and disposition, were all
equally against her. Her father was a clergyman, without
being neglected, or poor, and a very respectable man,
though his name was Richard —and he had never been
handsome. He had a considerable independence besides
two good livings—and he was not in the least addicted
to locking up his daughters. Her mother was a woman
of useful plain sense, with a good temper, and, what is
more remarkable, with a good constitution. She had
three sons before Catherine was born; and instead of
dying in bringing the latter into the world, as anybody
might expect, she still lived on—lived to have six
children more—to see them growing up around her,
and to enjoy excellent health herself. A family of ten
children will be always called a fine family, where there
are heads and arms and legs enough for the number;
but the Morlands had little other right to the word, for
they were in general very plain, and Catherine, for
many years of her life, as plain as any. She had a thin
awkward figure, a sallow skin without colour, dark lank
hair, and strong features—so much for her person; and
not less unpropitious for heroism seemed her mind.
She was fond of all boy’s plays, and greatly preferred
cricket not merely to dolls, but to the more heroic
enjoyments of infancy, nursing a dormouse, feeding a
canary-bird, or watering a rose-bush, Indeed she had
no taste for a garden; and if she gathered flowers at all,
it was chiefly for the pleasure of mischief—at least so
it was conjectured from her always preferring those
which she was forbidden to take. Such were her
propensities —her abilities were quite as extraordinary.
She never could Jearn or understand anything before
she was taught; and sometimes not even then, for
she was often inattentive, and occasionally stupid.

Her mother was three months in teaching her only

to repeat the “Beggar’s Petition”; and after all, her

next sister, Sally, could say it better than she did.

Not that Catherine was always stupid—by no means;
she learnt the fable of “The Hare and Many Friends” as
quickly as any girl in England. Her mother wished her
to learn music; and Catherine was sure she should like it,
for she was very fond of tinkling the keys of the old
forlorn spinner; so, at eight years old she began. She
learnt a year, and could not bear it; and Mrs. Morland,
who did not insist on her daughters being accomplished

152

in spite of incapacity or distaste, allowed her to leave
off. The day which dismissed the music-master was
one of the happiest of Catherine's life. Her taste for
drawing was not superior; though whenever she could
obtain the outside of a letter from her mother or seize
upon any other odd piece of paper, she did what she
could in that way, by drawing houses and trees, hens
and chickens, all very much like one another. Writing
and accounts she was taught by her father; French

by her mother: her proficiency tn either was not
remarkable, and she shirked her lessons in both
whenever she could. What a strange, unaccountable
character! —for with all these symptoms of profligacy
at ten years old, she had neither a bad heart nor a bad
temper, was seldom stubborn, scarcely ever
quarrelsome, and very kind to the little ones, with
few interruptions of tyranny; she was moreover noisy
and wild, hated confinement and cleanliness, and
loved nothing so well in the world as rolling down the
green slope at the back of the house.

50

55

60

65

The narrator indicates that on the whole, the
Morlands’ appearance was

A) unremarkable.

B) intimidating.

C) uncommonly attractive.
D) somewhat peculiar.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 5-8 (Her... handsome”)

B) Lines 10-12 (“Her...constitution”)
C) Lines 17-18 (“A family... family”)
D) Lines 20-21 (“but.,.plain”)

--- PAGE 152 ---
As presented in the passage, Catherine could best
be described as

A)
B)
C)
D)

charming.
heroic.
rambunctious.
gifted.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A)
B)
C)
D)

5 I

Lines 30-31 (“and...mischief”’)
Lines 33-34 (“Such...extraordinary”)
Line 41 (‘“Not...means”)

Lines 65-66 (“she...cleanliness”’)

The narrator indicates that Mrs. Morland was

A)
B)
C)
D)

weak and sickly.

sturdy and practical.
short-tempered and irritable.
creative and enthusiastic.

The passage indicates that Catherine responded
to her parents’ lessons by

A)
B)
C)
D)

participating eagerly.
turning them into games.
avoiding them if possible.
refusing to pay attention.

153

--- PAGE 153 ---
Explanations: Literal Comprehension Exercises

1.1-2 B,C

If you use the main point of the passage (people stick to familiar w/ Internet), you can identify B)
as the correct answer to 1.1 right away. When you go to plug in line references, you already know
that the correct set of lines must be related to the idea that the Internet does not encourage people
to learn about unfamiliar topics. Only C) contains lines that explicitly address that idea (there’s
little pushing us beyond our comfort zones), so it is the answer to 1.2,

If you don’t remember the answer from the passage, the easiest way to approach this pair of
questions is to plug in the line references from 1.2. The lines cited in A) and B) provide no
information about how Internet users behave online, and D) does not discuss how Internet users
actually behave - it only speculates about what might happen if they found new information.
Again, only C) explicitly describes how users behave: they stick to their comfort zones, i.e., are
unadventurous.

2.1-2C,B

The easiest way to answer this question is to use the main point and answer the questions in
order. Main point: yawns = empathy in primates, BUT animals? (Yawns are associated with
empathy in primates, but the association isn’t clear in other animals.) Empathy = attuned to
others, making C) the answer to 2.1. The correct answer to 2.2 must support the association
between empathy and yawning. That answer is B) because lines 9-11 state that yawning is
governed by the same parts of the brain that govern empathy.

2.3-4A,C

The easiest way to approach this question is to use the main point: yawning = empathy in
primates, BUT not clear for animals. Not clear = more wucertain. For 2.4, the correct lines must
indicate it isn’t clear whether empathy is related to yawning in non-primate animals. Now
consider how the passage is organized: the author first discusses primates, including humans,
then switches to non-primates toward the end. You can thus focus on the later line references,
narrowing your choices to C) and D). C) is correct because lines 20-21 state that the relationship
between yawning and empathy in non-primates is less clear-cut (=more uncertain).

3.1-2B, A

The first question provides a line reference, so start by using it. What information do we get
about that kind of house in and around line 22? That it’s darkish and smells of dishwater and cabbage
(lines 23-25). In other words, it’s not a very pleasant place. In 3.1, C) can be eliminated because
it’s clearly positive. D) is a bit too extreme, so you can assume it’s wrong as well. If you're still not
sure about B), check the line references in 3.2, and see whether they provide any additional
direction. A) provides that direction. Lines 6-8 indicate that the neighborhood is dingy and
depressing. That is consistent with B) in 3.1, and A) is the answer to 3.2.

154

--- PAGE 154 ---
Jngitertmeeeeserenenemmey nan cmnanreare ie neh wera Aigner panenincente mca

|
e

Sater tt AEA SAR HM NEM NDNA A gi

3.3-4 A, C

Because there’s no line reference in 3.3, plug in the line references from 3.4 in order. You can
eliminate A) quickly because lines 32-33 are about Rosemary’s letters, not Mrs. Wisbeach. Lines
36-39 mention Mrs. Wisbeach but provide no information about Gordon’s actual encounter with
her, so B) can be eliminated as well. C) is correct because lines 42-45 state that If was quite
impossible to get in or out of the house...without being scrutinized. That means Mrs, Wisbeach caught
Gordon every single time. In other words, their encounter was “inevitable.” That makes A) the
answer to 3.3 and C) the answer to 3.4.

3.5-6 D, C

Because there’s no line reference in 3.5, plug in the line references from 3.6. You can eliminate A)
and B) quickly because lines 52-55 and 63-65 have nothing to do with Gordon's papers. C) is
correct because lines 73-74 indicate that only Gordon possessed the “key” to his labyrinth of
papers. In other words, he was the only person to whom the papers were comprehensible. That
makes D) the answer to 3.5 and C) the answer to 3.6,

4.1A

If you know the main point (eliminating traffic signals improves traffic), you can make an
educated guess that either A) or B) is the answer to 4.1 because those are the most positive
answers. Then, when you go back to the passage, you only have to determine whether driving
without traffic signals takes more or less time. To search for this information efficiently, look for
the key word “time.” If you scan from the beginning, you'll find the answer in lines 41-42, where
the author states that [removing traffic signals] also cuts down on journey times - that is, removing
traffic signals makes trips less time-consuming. A) is thus correct.

4.2-3 B, D

Because there’s no line reference in 4.2, plug in the line references in 4.3 in order. A) can be
eliminated because lines 13-15 only indicate that many countries are creating areas without
traffic signals, and B) can be eliminated because fines 30-32 only discuss Monderman’s problem
with traffic engineering - neither answer provides any information about urban planning. C) is
incorrect because the quote only reveals Monderman’s belief that removing traffic signals can
work anywhere, Like A) and B), this answer says nothing about urban planning. D) is correct
because in line 65, the phrase urbanization simply translates as uniformity is used to support the idea
that Recent city planning... has evolved along the saie lines around the world. In other words, it’s the
same everywhere, i.e., uniform. That makes B) the answer to 4.2 and D) the answer to 4.3.

§.1-2 B, B

Although this is a main point question, it focuses on only a small part of the passage. Unless you
remember the answer, you should plug in the line references from 5.2 and work through them in
order, Remember, though, that main points are most likely to be found in topic sentences, so you
want to pay particular attention to line references involving them, Be very careful with A). Lines
38-41 do discuss satellite areas, and if you’re not working carefully, the reference to withdrawing
force might seem to support D) in 5.1. The problem is that lines 38-41 focus on the Soviets’
behavior toward satellite regimes, not on the satellite regimes’ behavior toward other countries.
So A) doesn’t work. For B), the fact that lines 45-48 include a topic sentence should immediately
alert you to their potential importance. What do we learn from those lines? That the United States
is not primarily concerned that these [satellite] governments have any particular social or political
complexion. In other words, the United States doesn’t care what the people living under Soviet
control choose, as long as they are given the opportunity to choose freely. That idea corresponds
to B) in 5.1 and makes B) the correct answer to 5.2 as well.

155

--- PAGE 155 ---
5.34

The question asks what Hungary, Rumania, and Bulgaria are examples of, so your job is to figure
out what point those countries are cited to support. Remember that the reference to lines 28-29
does not indicate that the answer will be in those lines; it simply gives you a starting point.
Because lines 28-29 are right in the middle of the paragraph, you need to read from a few lines
above to a few lines below for context. The sentence in which the key words from the passage
appear indicates that the Soviets have broken their promises (pledges), and the next sentence
indicates that they pledged their belief in freedom at Tehran. Logically, Hungary, Romania, and
Bulgaria are examples of the Soviets’ broken Tehran pledge, so A) is the answer. B) is incorrect
because those countries have not been liberated - the passage implies just the opposite. C) is
incorrect because Acheson clearly states that United States does not want satellites. D) is incorrect
because the passage provides no information about these countries’ desire to accept peace
treaties,

5.4-5C, A

If you know that the Soviet Regime was the United States’ enemy during the Cold War, you can
probably narrow down the answers to B) and C) since those are the only negative options. But
even if you don’t know anything about Soviet-American Cold War relations, this is a fairly
straightforward question: plugging in line references will allow you to identify the answer almost
immediately. Lines 7-10 state that the Soviet Union has shown itself prepared to resort to any method
or stratagem, including subversion, threats, and even military force. That is the definition of “ruthless,”
making C) the answer to 5.4 and A) the answer to 5.5.

6.1-2D, B

Although you're given a line reference, it provides little information other than the fact that the
unfrozen groundwater may support previously unknown microbial life. The question asks what this
water “once” was, so plug in the line references and see which one provides information about
frozen groundwater in the past. Lines 5-6 only indicate a possible use for the findings about
groundwater. They say nothing about the groundwater in the past, so A) can be eliminated. The
key to recognizing B) as the correct answer to 6.2 is to recognize that the phrase fhese unfrozen
materials refers to unfrozen groundwater - if you overlook the fact the author is referring to the
same thing two different ways, you'll overlook the answer. Lines 20-21 state that the
groundwater was part of past surface ecosystems, indicating that D) is the correct answer to 6.1.
Otherwise, C) and D) can be eliminated in 6.2 because lines 31-34 focus on the future, not the
past, and lines 47-48 only discuss an advantage of interconnected lakes.

6.3-4C0,C

If you remember reading about how the SkyTEM project's findings could help scientists better
understand life on Mars, you might be tempted to pick B) and then look for a set of lines in 6.4 to
support that answer. Unfortunately, there isn’t one. So plug in the answers in order, looking for
information about the findings from the project. A) in 6.4 is incorrect because 8-10 just describe
SkyTEM itself; they say nothing about its findings, novel or otherwise. B) in 6.4 is incorrect
because lines 25-28 only indicate what the project could find, not what it has actually found. C) in
6.4 is correct because the phrase findings show for the first time indicates a “novel” (new) finding,
namely that connectivity between bodies of water can help ecosystems handle difficult periods
(=create hardier ecoystems), That makes C) the answer to 6.3 as well, D) in 6.4 is incorrect
because lines 75-76 do not describe a novel finding specific to the SkyTEM project.

156

--- PAGE 156 ---
e
2
3
&

pat A na we MeN BONN TN

‘
‘
ES
:
i
i
‘

7.1-2A,D

Unless you happen to remember the discussion of the Morlands’ appearances (unlikely, since it
comprises a very small section of the passage), the easiest way to work through this question is to
plug each line reference from 7.2 into 7.1. A) is incorrect because lines 5-8 only provide
information about Mr. Morland, not the family as a whole. B) is incorrect because lines 10-12
focus on Mrs. Morland’s personality, not on her appearance; they also say nothing about the rest
of the family. C) is incorrect because lines 17-18 refer to the size of the Mozland family, not to the
appearance of its members. D) is correct because lines 20-21 indicate that the Morlands’
appearance was plain, i.e., unremarkable. A) is thus the correct answer to 7.1.

7.3-4C, D

If you've gotten the gist of the passage, you should be able to eliminate B) and D). The narrator’s
whole point is that Catherine isn’t particularly heroic or gifted. If you're stuck between A) and C),
check the answers in 7.4 in order. There is nothing in lines 30-31 to suggest that Catherine was
charming, so eliminate A). Likewise, neither lines 33-34 nor line 41 provides any information
about those qualities. D) is the answer to 7.4 because the description of Catherine as noisy and wild
in lines 65-66 directly supports the idea of rambunctiousness. That makes C) the answer to 7.3.

7.5B

Since the question itself does not provide a line reference and there is no supporting evidence
question to narrow down the location of answer, the fastest way to answer 7.5 is to start from the
beginning of the passage and skim for references to Mrs. Morland, pulling your finger down the
page as you read. Working this way, you'll find the answer very quickly. Lines 10-12 state that
Catherine’s mother was a woman of usefitl plain sense (=practical), with a good temper, and, what is
more remarkable, with a good constitution (=sturdy). That makes B) correct.

7.6C

If you get the gist of the passage, you should be able to eliminate both A) and B) right away. The
narrator is pretty clear that Catherine isn’t a particularly enthusiastic student. To decide between
the remaining answers, you'll most likely need to locate the correct section of the passage;
unfortunately, there’s no supporting evidence question to guide you. The key phrase in the
question is “parents’ lessons,” so skim from the beginning of the passage, searching for those
words or related phrases. The answer appears in lines 56-60, which indicate that Catherine’s
mother taught her French and her father accounting, and that slie shirked her lessons in both
whenever she cowuld. In other words, she avoided her lessons if possible, making C) the answer. Be
very careful with D): not paying attention is not the same thing as shirking, which means
“evading” or, more colloquially, “blowing off.” Although not paying attention would certainly be
consistent with Catherine’s general behavior, the specific wording in this section of the passage
points to C).

157

--- PAGE 157 ---
Reasonable Inferences

Inference questions test what a particular section of a passage suggests or implies. They are
Jess common than literal comprehension questions but are often accompanied by supporting
evidence questions as well. They are usually phrased in the following ways:

* In lines x-y, King implies that freedom...
¢ The author of the passage suggests that physicists may eventually...

° Itcan be most reasonably inferred from the passage that long-distance runners...

The most important thing to understand about inference questions is that they are essentially
literal comprehension questions with a twist. Correct answers simply make explicit what the
passage implies. All of the necessary information is there; you just have to put the pieces
together.

It is also essential to understand that inferences on the SAT are much smaller than the kinds
of inferences you may be accustomed to making in English class. For example, if you read a
novel in which a character becomes angry, you might think that the author is suggesting that
the character is a bad person or warning the reader not to behave in the same way. On the
SAT, the only thing that you can infer is that the character is not happy and, if it is suggested
in the passage, the reason the character experiences that emotion.

It is true that some inference questions will require you to make slightly larger leaps than
others, but only slightly larger. Although answers to inference questions will not be stated
word-for-word in the passage, the passage will always contain specific wording that
clearly corresponds to a particular idea, event, or relationship in the correct answer.

As a result, the presence of supporting evidence questions can actually make inference
questions easier. Instead of having to consider the entire passage AND make the correct
inference, the supporting evidence question will at least provide specific locations for the
information you need to make a valid inference,

Because inference questions ask you to go a step beyond what the author is literally saying,
you should be prepared to work very carefully and avoid leaping to conclusions. That is true
everywhere, but it is especially true here. If you don’t feel ready to handle an inference
question when you first encounter it, skip it and come back to it after you have answered the
more straightforward questions.

158

--- PAGE 158 ---
agatnwgnesioarnargneat tevin

eit engi

3
4
i
é
i
#

NYE AS pp ALOE TINEA 2 rah LR a panna

PAS yur APACE AAS TEEN RENE REIL

Tied DAREN

Fallacies and Incorrect Answers

Statements that go outside the bounds of what can be determined logically from a given
assertion are known as fallacies; incorrect answer choices to inference questions are fallacies,
and they involve various types of faulty reasoning. On the SAT, fallacies can be difficult to
identify because you are required to sift through so much information, some of which is
relevant and some of which is not.

The key to dealing with inference questions is to make sure that you are absolutely clear
about the literal meaning of the lines in question. Ideally, you should take a couple of
seconds, make sure you understand them, jot down a short (3-4 word) summary, and look
for the answer closest in overall meaning to that statement. That answer should be correct.

Because the right answer might be phrased in a way you're not expecting, it is crucial that
you not eliminate any answer without making sure you really understand what it’s saying
and how it relates to the lines in question. Knowing how to recognize a couple of common
fallacies can also help you identify incorrect answers more easily.

One very common type of fallacy involves speculation: that is, an answer could be true based
on the information in the passage, but there isn’t enough information to judge whether it is
actually true. Some of these answers are quite obviously wrong because they are so far
outside the bounds of what is discussed in the passage that they are patently absurd, while
others sound so plausible that it seems that they should be true. In fact, some of them may
be true - they just won’t be supported by the passage.

Another common type of fallacy involves the reasoning, “if x is true in one case, then x is
true in all cases/has always been true,” or “if x is true for one member of a group, then it is
true for all members of that group.” In reality, the only thing that x being true in one
particular case suggests is that x is true in that one particular case. It does not automatically
mean that x will be true in any other case or for any other person.

Such fallacies are characterized by extreme words such as always, never, all, and only. You
should be suspicious of any answer choice that contains this type of wording. To be sure,
there are cases in which a given statement will imply that a particular fact applies to all (or
no) situations/ people, but they are comparatively rare.

Important: Make ‘sure that you pay close attention to answer choices that are phrased
negatively (ones that contain the word not) or that contain double negatives (e.g., not
impossible = possible). Unless you carefully work out what this type of wording actually
means, it is very easy to become confused by it.

This is very important because one of the easiest ways to create a valid inference is to rewrite
the original statement from a different angle. For example, if a passage states that a
particular star is much older than the Earth, a valid inference is that the star is not younger
than the Earth.

159

--- PAGE 159 ---
10

For the past decade, Florida's oranges have been
literally starving. Since it first appeared in 2005,
citrus greening, also known by its Chinese name,
huanglongbing, has swept across Florida’s groves
like a flood. With no hills to block it, the Asian citrus
15 psyllid—the invasive aphid relative that carries the
disease —has infected nearly every orchard in the
state. By one estimate, 80 percent of Florida’s citrus
trees are infected and declining.

Let’s look at some examples of reasonable and unreasonable inferences. Consider the
following sentences:

Every time a car drives through a major intersection, — |
it becomes a data point. Magnetic coils of wire lie just
beneath the pavement, registering each passing car, i

i

Because the author refers to magnetic coils of wire immediately after he states that a car
becomes a data point every time it drives through a major intersection, we can infer that the
magnetic coils of wire play a role in turning cars into data points. Although the author does
not directly state that one is a result of the other, he strongly implies it by placing those two
pieces of information next to one another. Given how texts are normally structured, there is
essentially no other reason to mention the magnetic coils in that particular place.

Because the author states that the magnetic coils of wire record the cars from below the
pavement, we can infer that coils of wire do not need to be above ground to do their job.

We cannot, however, infer that magnetic coils are the best way of tracking cars’ movement;
these sentences give us nothing to compare the cars to,

Likewise, we cannot infer that magnetic coils are only - or even mostly - used below the
pavement, or that their only/primary use is to track cars, Those things might very well be
true, but we do not have enough information to determine whether they are actually true.

Let’s look at another example, It’s excerpted from a passage we've seen before, but we’re just
going to look at a small part of it.

We're going to focus on lines 11-17 - the second and third sentences, particularly the third
sentence. We can make several inferences from those lines. First, from the statement Witt no
hills to block it, the Asian citrus psyllid...tas infected nearly every orchard in the state, we can
reasonably infer that the Asian citrus psyllid can be stopped by hills. We can also infer that
not every orchard in the state has been infected, ie., some orchards in the state have not
been infected.

If we back up to the second sentence, we can also infer that Florida’s citrus groves do not
have hills - if they did, the Asian citrus psyllid would be unable to spread like a flood.

Let’s look at some more examples.

160

--- PAGE 160 ---
VASA RAEN BTN Ata Me

§
f
g
4
$
3
i
‘
§
i

oa ManACRT AIC

PERN CAME RN tO HO MO BS

10

4S

20

30

35

40

45

This passage is from Barbara Jordan‘s keynote address
at the 1976 Democratic National Convention. A Texas
native, Jordan was the first African-American woman to
represent the Deep South in Congress.

It was one hundred and forty-four years ago that
members of the Democratic Party first met in
convention to select a Presidential candidate. A lot of
years passed since 1832, and during that time it would
have been most unusual for any national political party
to ask a Barbara Jordan to deliver a keynote address.
But tonight, here Iam. And I feel that notwithstanding
the past that my presence here is one additional bit of
evidence that the American Dream need not forever be
deferred.

Now that I have this grand distinction, what in the
world am I supposed to say? I could list the problems
which cause people to feel cynical, angry, frustrated:
problems which include lack of integrity in government;
the feeling that the individual no longer counts; feeling
that the grand American experiment is failing or has
failed. I could recite these problems, and then I could
sit down and offer no solutions. But I don't choose to do
that either. The citizens of America expect more.

We are a people in search of a national community.
We are a people trying not only to solve the problems of
the present, unemployment, inflation, but we are
attempting on a larger scale to fulfill the promise of

America. We are attempting to fulfill our national purpose,
25 to create and sustain a society in which all of us are equal.

And now we must look to the future. Let us heed the
voice of the people and recognize their common sense.
If we do not, we not only blaspheme our political
heritage, we ignore the common ties that bind all
Americans. Many fear the future. Many are distrustful
of their leaders, and believe that their voices are never
heard. Many seek only to satisfy their private interests.
But this is the great danger America faces — that we will
cease to be one nation and become instead a collection
of interest groups: city against suburb, region against
region, individual against individual; each seeking to

satisfy private wants. If that happens, who then will speak
for America? Who then will speak for the common good?

This is the question which must be answered in 1976:
Are we to be one people bound together by common

spirit, sharing in a common endeavor; or will we become

a divided nation? For all of its uncertainty, we cannot
flee the future. We must address and master the future
together. It can be done if we restore the belief that we
share a sense of national community, that we share a
common national endeavor.

161

There is no executive order; there is no law that
can require the American people to form a national
community. This we must do as individuals, and if we

50 do itas individuals, there is no President of the United
States who can veto that decision.

As a first step, we must restore our belief in
ourselves. We are a generous people, so why can't we
be generous with each other?

55 And now, what are those of us who are elected public
officials supposed to do? We call ourselves “public
servants” but I'll tell you this: We as public servants
must set an example for the rest of the nation. It is
hypocritical for the public official to admonish and

60 exhort the people to uphold the common good if we are
derelict in upholding the common good. More is
required of public officials than slogans and handshakes
and press releases,

If we promise as public officials, we must deliver.

65 If we as public officials propose, we must produce.

If we say to the American people, “It is time for you to
be sacrificial” - sacrifice. And again, if we make
mistakes, we must be willing to admit them. What we
have to do is strike a balance between the idea that

70 government should do everything and the idea that
government ought to do nothing.

Let there be no illusions about the difficulty of
forming this kind of a national community. It's tough,
difficult, not easy. But a spirit of harmony will survive

75 in America only if each of us remembers, when self-
interest and bitterness seem to prevail, that we share a
common destiny.

We cannot improve on the system of government
handed down to us by the founders of the Republic.

80 There is no way to improve upon that. But what we can
do is to find new ways to implement that system and
realize our destiny.

The author most strongly suggests which of the
following about the “common endeavor” (line 41)

A) It represents an impossible ideal.

B) It has the potential to be destroyed by
uncertainty.

C) It cannot be realized through legislation.

D) It represents a combination of public and
private interests.

--- PAGE 161 ---
Which choice provides the best evidence for
the answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 33-35 (“But... groups”)

B) Lines 42-43 (“For...future”)

C) Lines 47-49 (“There is...community”)
D) Lines 56-58 (“We... nation”)

There are a few ways to go about answering this question.
Option 1: The Shortcut

Remember that little trick we talked about way back in Chapter 1, the one about second
meanings often signaling correct answers?

Well, there’s an answer here that includes a common word used in its second meaning:
realized, in choice C). Realized normally means “became aware of,” but here it’s used to mean
“achieved.” That usage signals that C) is likely correct, but you still need to check.

The line references in Question #2 tell you that the answers to both questions are located
somewhere between lines 33 and 58. If you’re a strong reader and skim through that section
with a clear idea of what you're looking for, you'll find the answer in lines 47-49.

No executive order; no law = cannot be realized (accomplished) through legislation.
Option 2: Answer the Question Yourself

The fact that you’re given a line reference means that you have a pretty good chance of being
able to answer the question on your own without having to plug in every line reference.

The only potential downside is that the lines you come up with to support your answer
might not be the same lines provided in the second question, so you might have to do a bit
more reading around than you'd like,

The first thing to do is to define the key phrase conimon endeavor.

Let’s consider the context of the passage. Jordan’s main concern is that the United States
is becoming fragmented into a collection of interest groups: city against suburb, region against
region, individual against individual; each seeking to satisfy private wants. In fact, if we were to
write a main point, we might say something like “ America must UNITE f/future.”

Coming back to the key phrase, Jordan essentially answers the question a couple of lines

down when she states that We (all Americans) niust address and master the future together. So the
correct answer must be consistent with that idea.

162

--- PAGE 162 ---
A)
B)

Mei RC ECE PRA ARTE Hey

SON ee

C)
D)

cag

ini NBO Rt ROS STE

s
&
:
é
4
x
.
x
g
3
i
a
z

a TS

i
:
%

The author most strongly suggests which of the
following about the “common endeavor” (line 41)

It represents an impossible ideal.

It has the potential to be destroyed by
uncertainty.

It cannot be realized through legislation.

It represents a combination of public and
private interests.

When you look at the answer choices, there’s unfortunately no option that directly rephrases
the idea that Americans must come together. You can, however, play process of elimination
pretty effectively.

A) can be eliminated because Jordan states in line 44 that it can be done. The extreme word
impossible also suggests that the answer is wrong.

B) takes a word (uncertainty) from the passage and presents it in a different context. The
passage only states that the future is unavoidable despite the fact that it is uncertain (The
phrase for all means “ despite”). As a result, this answer is off-topic.

C) is an answer you might overlook initially. You must be careful not to eliminate it simply
because you don’t remember anything about it. If you have a very strong sense of logic, you
may be able to figure out that if the “endeavor” depends on the American people’s uniting,
then by definition, it cannot be accomplished by legislation. But if you’re not sure, just leave
this option alone for the time being.

D) might seem tempting because Jordan does refer to private interests in line 32; however,
she cites them as a danger to the common good, something that distracts people from
focusing on what they have in common. So this answer indicates exactly the opposite of
what the passage says.

That leaves you with C). Now, you must check each line reference to see whether it supports
the idea of something that cannot be accomplished through legislation. Although the process
may be somewhat tedious, the good news is that you at least have a general idea of what
information the correct lines must convey.

Again, you can use the information in Question #2 to tell you that the answer to Question #1
is located somewhere between lines 33 and 58. Because that is only 26 lines, you may find it
easiest to simply reread that section of the passage until you hit on the necessary
information. In line 47, the phrases no executive order and no law are directly consistent with
the idea of legislation, making C) the answer to Question #2 as well as Question #1.

A), B), and D) can be eliminated as possible answers to Question #2 because the lines they
cite are all off-topic.

163

--- PAGE 163 ---
Option 3: Plug in Line References

When you’re given a line reference in the first question, this method usually isn’t ideal
because it can end up being unnecessarily confusing and time consuming. But that said,
we're going to try it anyway, just to see how it works.

Even though we’re going to rely more heavily on the passage from the start than we did for
the other methods, we still need to do some work upfront.

Again, we’re going to define the key phrase common endeavor in context of the main point
(Americans must UNITE f/ future) so that we know what we’re looking for when we go back
to the passage.

Next, we can check each set of lines to see whether it matches the idea in the key phrase.
Remember, though, that because this is an inference question, the correct answer may be
stated from a somewhat different angle.

A) But this is the great danger America faces — that we will cease to be one nation and become
instead a collection of interest groups.

These lines are related to the same general idea as the key phrase, but they tell us only about
the danger, The endeavor itself is to unite, and these lines discuss the opposite.

B) For all of its uncertainty, we cannot flee the future.

No, this has nothing to do with people uniting. It’s off-topic.

C) There is no executive order; there is no law that can require the American people to form a
national community.

Even if you’re not sure about this one, the phrase national community should make you pay
closer attention because it’s directly related to the idea of people uniting.

D) We call ourselves “public servants” but I’1l tell you this: We as public servants must set an
example for the rest of the nation.

This has nothing to do with the American people uniting.

The only answer that seems generally consistent with the question is C). Now you can work
backwards, looking at the answers to the first question. Lines 47-49 clearly support the idea
that the “endeavor” cannot be accomplished through legislation, giving you C) as the
answer to Question #1.

At this point, we're going to look at some inference questions without line references.
Although these questions may seem more difficult than ones with line references, it is
sometimes possible to use the big picture, as well as an understanding of how texts are
structured, to identify correct answers without too much fuss.

164

--- PAGE 164 ---
:
3
@
%
§
‘
:
i
b

se aN EINER RENO ete

Es
4
4

5 Ng Sea aye a VAM nies, ae

&
%
:
a
£
;
€
Fs
z

4
&
k
g
4

PIO G5 AO ARE DI!

nese

oe ap

sis

ENO ANA GREY NOTE 2 VOD OLES Om Healy A AATNG, «2

10

15

20

25

30

Every time a car drives through a major intersection,
it becomes a data point. Magnetic coils of wire lie just
beneath the pavement, registering each passing car. This
starts a cascade of information: Computers tally the
number and speed of cars, shoot the data through
underground cables to a command center and finally
translate it into the colors red, yellow and green. On the
seventh floor of Boston City Hall, the three colors
splash like paint across a wall-sized map.

To drivers, the color red means stop, but on the map
it tells traffic engineers to leap into action, Traffic control
centers like this one—a room cluttered with computer
terminals and live video feeds of urban intersections —
represent the brain of a traffic system. The city’s network
of sensors, cables and signals are the nerves connected to
the rest of the body. “Most people don't think there are
eyes and ears keeping track of all this stuff,” says John
DeBenedictis, the center's engineering director, But in
reality, engineers literally watch our every move,
making subtle changes that relieve and redirect traffic.

The tactics and aims of traffic management are modest
but powerful. Most intersections rely on a combination of
pre-set timing and computer adaptation. For example,
where a busy main road intersects with a quiet residential
street, the traffic signal might give 70 percent of “green
time” to the main road, and 30 percent to the residential
road. (Green lights last between a few seconds and a
couple minutes, and tend to shorten at rush hour to help
the traffic move continuously.) But when traffic
overwhelms the pre-set timing, engineers override the
system and make changes.

i

It is reasonable to infer that improvements in
traffic flow

A) are more difficult to achieve at certain
hours of the day.

B) occur near traffic control centers.

C) can be attributed to pre-set systems.

D) are the result of intervention by traffic
engineers.

Which choice provides the best evidence for
the answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 4-7 (“computers...green’’)
B) Lines 11-14 (“Traffic...system”)
C) Lines 18-20 (“But... traffic’)

D) Lines 22-23 (“Most...adaptation’”)

Because this passage isn’t too long, it’s reasonable to try answering Question #1 without

using any of the line references in Question #2.

If you work from the main point (which ideally you should have underlined), you can
actually answer this question very, very quickly. What's the point? That traffic engineers see
everything. Where is it located? In lines 18-20 (But...traffic). In Question #1, D) essentially
rephrases the main point, and C) in Question #2 cites those exact lines.

If you’re not sure you can reliably use this type of shortcut, you can of course plug in.

It is reasonable to infer that improvements in
traffic flow

A) Lines 4-7 (‘“computers...green”)
B) Lines 11-14 (“Traffic...system”)
C) Lines 18-20 (But... traffic’)

D) Lines 22-23 (“Most...adaptation”)

165

--- PAGE 165 ---
A) Computers tally the number and speed of cars, shoot the data through underground cables
to a command center and finally translate it into the colors red, yellow and green.

No. This tells us nothing about traffic flow, only about how the movements of individual
cars are recorded,

B) Traffic control centers like this one—a room cluttered with computer terminals and live
video feeds of urban intersections— represent the brain of a traffic system.

This line extends the metaphor between a traffic control center and the human body. It
doesn’t actually talk about traffic itself.

C) But in reality, engineers literally watch our every move, making subtle changes that relieve
and redirect traffic.

Here we finally do have some information about traffic. What do engineers do? They make
changes that relieve traffic (that is, make it less jammed). In other words, they improve its
flow. So this answer works. Note also the second meaning of relieve.

D) Most intersections rely on a combination of pre-set timing and computer adaptation.

This choice only talks about intersections (specific), not traffic (general).

So the answer is C). Now we can work backwards. If engineers are constantly watching
people, making changes to relieve and redirect traffic, then improved traffic flow must be the
result of their intervention. So the answer to Question #1 is D).

Let's try a longer passage.

166

--- PAGE 166 ---
‘
§
i
f

Sib SAN BNE hg ABER MTN ARE ESAS

Me RIN wks Rade

SIERO e ate NRE IN OL roast RMON TIA gE eg ARAN

4
i
i
é
‘

&
¥
z
8
iH

The following passage is adapted from Willa Cather,
My Antonia, originally published in 1918. The narrator
recounts his life on the Nebraska plains as a boy.

On the afternoon of that Sunday F took my first
long ride on my pony, under Otto’s direction. After
that Dude and I went twice a week to the post-office,
six miles east of us, and I saved the men a good

5 deal of time by riding on errands to our neighbors.
When we had to borrow anything, I was always the
messenger.

All the years that have passed have not dimmed my
memory of that first glorious autumn. The new country

40 lay open before me: there were no fences in those days,
and I could choose my own way over the grass uplands,
trusting the pony to get me home again. Sometimes I
followed the sunflower-bordered roads.

[ used to love to drift along the pale-yellow cornfields,

15 looking for the damp spots one sometimes found at their
edges, where the smartweed soon turned a rich copper
color and the narrow brown leaves hung curled like
cocoons about the swollen joints of the stem. Sometimes
I went south to visit our German neighbors and to

20 admire their catalpa grove, or to see the big elm tree
that grew up out of a deep crack in the earth and had a
hawk's nest in its branches. Trees were so rare in that
country, and they had to make such a hard fight to grow,
that we used to feel anxious about them, and visit them

25 as if they were persons. It must have been the scarcity of
detail in that tawny landscape that made detail so
precious.

Sometimes I rode north to the big prairie-dog town to
watch the brown earth-owls fly home in the late afternoon

30 and go down to their nests underground with the dogs.
Antonia Shimerda liked to go with me, and we used to
wonder a great deal about these birds of subterranean
habit. We had to be on our guard there, for rattlesnakes
were always lurking about. They came to pick up an easy

35 living among the dogs and owls, which were quite
defenseless against them; took possession of their
comfortable houses and ate the eggs and puppies. We
felt sorry for the owls. It was always mournful to see
them come flying home at sunset and disappear under

40 the earth.

But, after all, we felt, winged things who would live
like that must be rather degraded creatures. The dog-town
was a long way from any pond or creek. Otto Fuchs said
he had seen populous dog-towns in the desert where

45 there was no surface water for fifty miles; he insisted that
some of the holes must go down to water—nearly two
hundred feet, hereabouts. Antonia said she didn't believe
it; that the dogs probably lapped up the dew in the early
morning, like the rabbits,

167

i
i
i
i
i
{
t
|
|
i
|
i
|
|
i
|
i
i
i
|
|
f
|
|
t
i
i
i
|
H
}
i
}
j
i
H
j
|
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
j
|
H
i
i
|
i
|
i

50 Antonia had opinions about everything, and she was
soon able to make them known. Almost every day she
came running across the prairie to have her reading
lesson with me. Mrs. Shimerda grumbled, but realized it
was important that one member of the family should

55 learn English. When the lesson was over, we used to go
up to the watermelon patch behind the garden. I split the
melons with an old corn-knife, and we lifted out the
hearts and ate them with the juice trickling through our
fingers. The white melons we did not touch, but we

60 watched them with curiosity. They were to be picked
later, when the hard frosts had set in, and put away for
winter use. After weeks on the ocean, the Shimerdas
were famished for fruit. The two girls would wander for
miles along the edge of the cornfields, hunting for

65 ground-cherries.

Antonia loved to help grandmother in the kitchen
and to learn about cooking and housekeeping. She
would stand beside her, watching her every movement.
We were willing to believe that Mrs. Shimerda was a

70 good housewife in her own country, but she managed
poorly under new conditions. | remember how horrified
we were at the sour, ashy-grey bread she gave her
family to eat. She mixed her dough, we discovered, in
an old tin peck-measure that had been used about the

75 barn. When she took the paste out to bake it, she left
smears of dough sticking to the sides of the measure, put
the measure on the shelf behind the stove, and let this
residue ferment. The next time she made bread, she
scraped this sour stuff down into the fresh dough to

80 serve as yeast.

It is most reasonable to infer that access to the land
during the narrator’s youth was

A) reserved for a small group of settlers.

B) less restricted than it later became.

C) prohibited by the narrator’s neighbors.

D) controlled by Antonia Shimerda’s family,

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 9-12 (“The new...again’”)

B) Lines 18-22 (“Sometimes... branches”)
C) Lines 33-34 (“We...about”)

D) Lines 62-65 (“After...cherries”)

--- PAGE 167 ---
This question might look complicated, but it’s actually much simpler than it appears.
Although it appears to ask you to wade through a huge amount of information, it can
actually be solved relatively quickly - if, that is, you think carefully about what the correct
lines are saying.

This time, we're going to start by combining the two questions into one:

It is most reasonable to infer that access to the land
during the narrator’s youth was

A) Lines 9-12 (“The new...again’”)

B) Lines 18-22 (“Sometimes...branches”)
C) Lines 33-34 (“We..,about”)

D) Lines 62-65 (“After...cherries”)

If we start by checking out the line references in order, we'll hit on the answer immediately:

A) The new country lay open before me: there were no fences in those days, and [ could choose
my own way over the grass uplands, trusting the pony to get me home again.

The first thing to notice is that these lines contain a colon, and colons are important because
they signal explanations. You always want to pay close attention to the information after a
colon, and this is no exception.

What do we learn after the colon? That there were no fences in those days, and I could choose nry
own way over the grass uplands. In other words, the narrator had pretty much unrestricted
access to the land. The phrase in those days suggests that this is no longer the case - in other
words, access to the Jand was “less restricted” than it became later on.

A) is thus the answer to Question #2, and B) is the answer to Question #1.
That was a lot easier than it looked, right?

You could, of course, try to work through the two questions in order, but in this case that
approach could end up being both confusing and extremely time-consuming. Not only does
the passage not provide a line reference, but the aspect of the passage that it asks about is so
general that it is hard to pinpoint even a general area where the necessary information
would most likely appear. And because the information is hidden in the middle of a
paragraph close to the beginning, you are unlikely to remember specific details from that
paragraph. Even if you circled the colon in line 10 as you read through the passage, the
chance of your remembering to focus on that particular spot while answering this question
would be extremely slim.

One more. We’re going to try a science passage, this time without a supporting evidence
question after it.

168

--- PAGE 168 ---
Fi
4
=
5
g
:
4

EONS AACE RS INOT oh ag

Hi
g
&
é
é
3
%
)
H
&
¥
:

é
é
}
Es
}

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

The following passage is adapted from “The Origin of the
Ocean Floor” by Peter Keleman, © 2009 by The Nationa!
Geographic Society.

At the dark bottom of our cool oceans, 85 percent
of the earth’s volcanic eruptions proceed virtually

unnoticed. Though unseen, they are hardly insignificant.

Submarine volcanoes generate the solid underpinnings
of all the world’s oceans massive slabs of rock seven
kilometers thick.

Geophysicists first began to appreciate the
smoldering origins of the land under the sea, known
formally as ocean crust, in the early 1960s. Sonar
surveys revealed that volcanoes form nearly continuous
ridges that wind around the globe like seams on a
baseball. Later, the same scientists strove to explain
what fuels these erupting mountain ranges, called mid-
ocean ridges. Basic theories suggest that because ocean
crust pulls apart along the ridges, hot material deep

within the earth’s rocky interior must rise to fill the gap.

But details of exactly where the lava originates and
how it travels to the surface long remained a mystery.

In recent years mathematical models of the
interaction between molten and solid rock have
provided some answers, as have examinations of
blocks of old seafloor now exposed on the continents.
These insights made it possible to develop a detailed
theory describing the birth of ocean crust. The process
turns out to be quite different from the typical
layperson's idea, in which fiery magma fills an
enormous chamber underneath a volcano, then rages
upward along a jagged crack. Instead the process
begins dozens of kilometers under the seafloor, where
tiny droplets of melted rock ooze through microscopic
pores at a rate of about 10 centimeters a year, about
as fast as fingernails grow.

Closer to the surface, the process speeds up,
culminating with massive streams of lava pouring
over the seafloor with the velocity of a speeding truck.
Deciphering how liquid moves through solid rock
deep underground not only explains how ocean crust
emerges but also may elucidate the behavior of other
fluid-transport networks, including the river systems
that dissect the planet’s surface.

Far below the mid-ocean ridge volcanoes and their
countless layers of crust-forming lava is the mantle,

a 3,200-kilometer-thick layer of scorching hot rock
that forms the earth’s midsection and surrounds its
metallic core. At the planet’s cool surface, upthrusted
mantle rocks are dark green, but if you could see
them in their rightful home, they would be glowing
red- or even white-hot. The top of the mantle is about
! 300 degrees Celsius, and it gets about one degree

169

50 hotter with each kilometer of depth. The weight of
overlying rock means the pressure also increases
with depth about 1,000 atmospheres for every three
kilometers.

Knowledge of the intense heat and pressure in

55 the mantle led researchers to hypothesize in the late
1960s that ocean crust originates as tiny amounts
of liquid rock known as melt almost as though the
solid rocks were “sweating.” Even a minuscule
release of pressure (because of material rising from

60 its original position) causes melt to form in
microscopic pores deep within the mantle rock.

Explaining how the rock sweat gets to the
surface was more difficult. Melt is less dense than
the mantle rocks in which it forms, so it will

65 constantly try to migrate upward, toward regions of
lower pressure. But what laboratory experiments
revealed about the chemical composition of melt
did not seem to match up with the composition of
rock samples collected from the mid-ocean ridges,

70 where erupted melt hardens.

Using specialized equipment to heat and squeeze
crystals from mantle rocks in the laboratory,
investigators learned that the chemical composition
of melt in the mantle varies depending on the depth

75 at which it forms; the composition is controlled by
an exchange of atoms between the melt and the
minerals that make up the solid rock it passes through.
The experiments revealed that as melt rises, it
dissolves one kind of mineral, orthopyroxene, and

80 precipitates, or leaves behind, another mineral,
olivine, Researchers could thus infer that the higher
in the mantle melt formed, the more orthopyroxene
it would dissolve, and the more olivine it would
leave behind. Comparing these experimental findings

85 with lava samples from the mid-ocean ridges
revealed that almost all of them have the composition
of melts that formed at depths greater than 45
kilometers.

The author’s discussion of mid-ocean ridges
suggests that these ridges

A) are composed of orthopyrexene and olivine.
B) are maintained by the exchange of atoms.

C) are subject to less pressure than mantle rock is.
D) produce a wide range of minerals.

--- PAGE 169 ---
Start by identifying the key phrase (mid-ecean ridges) and locating it in the passage. It is very
important that you look for the entire phrase because it appears in only a few places. If you
look for a more general term, for example ocean, you won't know where to focus.

The key phrase appears in lines 13-14 and again in line 41, but be careful. Mid-ocean ridges
are only mentioned; the author doesn’t discuss them in-depth. If you focus too intently on
those places, you're likely to get caught in a loop of reading and rereading, trying to figure
out why you can’t seem to find an answer that fits.

Remember: if you can’t find the answer in the place you’re looking, it has to be
somewhere else. (Provided, of course, that you understand the passage.)

So move on. If you keep scanning, focusing on the first and last sentence of each paragraph,
you'll hit the third appearance of the key phrase in line 69. At this point, you must remember
to back up and read for context (as opposed to starting at line 69 and reading from there).
The purpose of a final sentence is to reiterate a point or draw a conclusion from the
preceding information. In addition, this sentence starts with but, and you can’t know what
idea it’s contradicting until you back up.

What do we learn from that paragraph? Basically, that “melt” migrates from the mantle
upward to areas of lower pressure, ultimately hardening at the mid-ocean ridge. We can
therefore assume that the mid-ocean ridge must be under less pressure than the mantle -
which is exactly what C) says.

If that seems like an awfully large jump to make on your own, let's play process of
elimination.

A) doesn’t work because the passage only states that orthopyrexene and olivine are present
in melt. It says nothing about those minerals in relationship to mid-ocean ridges.

B) is an answer you need to be careful with. The phrase exchange of atoms does appear, but
only in regard to the chemical composition of melt in the mantle. Again, there is nothing
about mid-ocean ridges.

See above for C). If you're not sure, leave it.

D) is vague and might therefore seem plausible, but unfortunately there’s nothing in the

passage to support the statement that mid-ocean ridges “produce a wide range of minerals.”
Don’t waste too much time looking. If it’s not there, it’s not there.

170

--- PAGE 170 ---
Unstated Assumptions

i Another type of inference question asks you to recognize an unstated assumption that can
be determined from the passage. When unstated-assumption questions accompany natural
science passages, they may ask you to identify the underlying question or hypothesis that
was tested in an experiment. Or, they may ask you to identify a statement with which the
author or an individual discussed in the passage would agree or disagree.

Answers to these questions follow the same basic rules as answers to other inference
: questions do. They may take information from the passage and restate it in a somewhat
i more general manner. They may also “fill in the blanks” by explicitly spelling out the
underlying logic on which a particular belief or conclusion is based.

Incorrect answers, on the other hand, will go beyond the bounds of what can reasonably be
inferred from the passage. They may include information that is factually true but irrelevant
to the lines in question. They may also use some of the same wording that is found in the
passage and alter it just enough so that it means something different from what it means in
the passage.

That said, we’re still going to look at some examples - just in case.

An unstated assumption made by the author about
vegetables is that their

i After the one-way front door, the first supermarket

: feature you inevitably encounter is the produce

9 department. There’s a good reason for this: the sensory
impact of all those scents, textures, and colors (think

5 fat tomatoes, glossy eggplants, luscious strawberries)

makes us feel both upbeat and hungry. Similarly the
store bakery is usually near the entrance, with its
scrumptious and pervasive smell of fresh-baked bread;
as is the flower shop, with its buckets of tulips, bouquets

10 of roses, and banks of greenery. The message we get
right off the bat is that the store is a welcoming place,
fresh, natural, fragrant, and healthy, with comforting
shades of grandma’s kitchen.

The cruel truth is that the produce department is less

15 garden and kitchen than stage set. Lighting is chosen to
make fruits and veggies appear at their brightest and
best; and — according to Martin Lindstrom, author of
Brandwashed: Tricks Companies Use to Manipulate Our
Minds and Persuade Us to Buy—the periodic sprays of

20 fresh water that douse the produce bins are all for show.
Though used to give fresh foods a deceptive dewy and

i fresh-picked look, the water actually has no practical

purpose. In fact, it makes vegetables spoil faster than

; they otherwise would.

A) appearance is not a reliable indicator of their
freshness,

B) nutritional qualities are often exaggerated.
C) fragrance is off-putting to some customers.

D) location within a supermarket depends on their
popularity.

¥
;
%
§
3
.
4
3
4
&
:
4
;
‘
4
a
z
4
x
3
é

Because there’s no line reference, the first thing you need to do is identify the key word and
i find it in the passage. To reiterate: the key word tells us the specific focus (topic) of the
question. Here, the key word is “vegetables”, so that’s what we're going to look for.

Pee E DUMONT dete

171

AAT OTN ARENA 3 0 ONE Neg NAITO,

--- PAGE 171 ---
55

60

65

70

This is where you need to be careful. The beginning of the passage provides some specific
examples of vegetables (tomatoes, eggplant), but the key word itself does not appear. To find
it, you need to go to the second paragraph. We get veggies in line 16, and vegetables in line 23.

While your first instinct might be to check these references in order, you’ re actually better off
checking the second one first. Why? Because it’s in the last sentence, and the last sentence is
always important. That sentence also begins with the transition In fact, whose purpose is to
emphasize the preceding idea. So it’s doubly important.

What do we learn from that section? That vegetables get sprayed with water so that they'll
look fresh, even though spraying them makes them spoil faster. In other words, they might
look nice, but they might not be all that fresh. That makes the answer A).

Notice that if you’d gotten stuck on the first paragraph, you could have easily fallen into a
loop of reading and rereading, and never figured how to get to the answer. B), C), and D) are
never addressed in the passage, but all of them sound plausible enough to seem like

reasonable guesses if you don’t really know what you're doing.

Next, consider this excerpt from the “ocean floor” passage:

Knowledge of the intense heat and pressure in
the mantle led researchers to hypothesize in the late
1960s that ocean crust originates as tiny amounts
of liquid rock known as melt almost as though the
solid rocks were “sweating.” Even a minuscule
release of pressure (because of material rising from
its original position) causes melt to form in
microscopic pores deep within the mantle rock.

Explaining how the rock sweat gets to the
surface was more difficult. Melt is less dense than
the mantle rocks in which it forms, so it will
constantly try to migrate upward, toward regions of
lower pressure. But what laboratory experiments
revealed about the chemical composition of melt
did not seem to match up with the composition of
rock samples collected from the mid-ocean ridges,
where erupted melt hardens.

In line 66, the author refers to “laboratory
experiments.” Which of the following was an
assumption researchers made during those
experiments?

OR:

In line 66, the author refers to “laboratory
experiments.” Based on the passage, which of the
following is a hypothesis the author suggests was
tested in those experiments?

A) Melted rock contains lower levels of
orthopyrexene than of olivine.

B) Melt is composed exclusively of olivine and
orthopyrexene.

C) Orthopyrexene only dissolves at depths
greater than 45 kilometers.

D) Rock sweat and hardened erupted melt have
similar chemical compositions.

Although the word assumption only appears in the first version, both questions are in fact
testing the same thing. In the second version, the word siggests indicates that this is an
inference question, meaning that the correct answer will not be stated word-for-word in the
passage. You are, however, given a line reference, so there is a clear starting point.

172

--- PAGE 172 ---
Pec ggee tps

Sean yenome MAN ten "

A AULYA ATOR CARIN aetna SEI 70 =

i
i
i

10

45

20

25

30

The key to answering questions like this is to remember that the correct answer only requires
you to make a very small leap from the passage. If you try to juggle too many pieces of
information at once, you'll get confused and end up staring at the answers without any idea
of how to decide between them.

We're going to start by reading the sentence that includes the line reference:
But what laboratory experiments revealed about the chemical composition of melt did
not seem to match up with the composition of rock samples collected from the mid-
ocean ridges, where erupted melt hardens.

The phrase did not seem to match up tells us that researchers found something different from

what they were expecting. What did they find? That the chemical composition of the melt

from the mantle (“rock sweat”) didn’t match the melt from the mid-ocean ridge.

Logically, then, what was their starting assumption? That the chemical composition of the

two types of melt would match. That makes D) the correct answer.

One more:

Sometimes it seems surprising that science
functions at all. In 2005, medical science was shaken
by a paper with the provocative title “Why most
published research findings are false.” Written by John
Ioannidis, a professor of medicine at Stanford University,
it didn’t actually show that any particular result was
wrong. Instead, it showed that the statistics of reported
positive findings was not consistent with how often one
should expect to find them. As Ioannidis concluded more
recently, “many published research findings are false or
exaggerated, and an estimated 85 percent of research
resources are wasted.”

It’s likely that some researchers are consciously
cherry-picking data to get their work published.

And some of the problems surely lie with journal
publication policies. But the problems of false findings
often begin with researchers unwittingly fooling
themselves: they fall prey to cognitive biases, common
modes of thinking that lure us toward wrong but
convenient or attractive conclusions. “Seeing the
reproducibility rates in psychology and other empirical
science, we can safely say that something is not working
out the way it should,” says Susann Fiedler, a behavioral
economist at the Max Planck Institute for Research on
Collective Goods in Bonn, Germany. “Cognitive biases
might be one reason for that.”

Psychologist Brian Nosek of the University of
Virginia says that the most common and problematic
bias in science is “motivated reasoning”: We interpret
observations to fit a particular idea, Psychologists have

173

shown that “most of our reasoning is in fact
rationalization,” he says. In other words, we have already
made the decision about what to do or to think, and our
“explanation” of our reasoning is really a justification for

: 35 doing what we wanted to do—or to believe—anyway.

Science is of course meant to be more objective and
skeptical than everyday thought—but how much is it,
really?

Based on the passage, Nosek would be most likely
to agree with which of the following statements?

A) The empirical sciences are less vulnerable to
bias than are other scientific fields.

B) Scientists should attempt to become aware of
their preconceptions.

C) The majority of false findings are the result
of deliberate distortion.

D) Science is a fundamentally irrational pursuit.

--- PAGE 173 ---
Despite the phrasing of the question, it’s only a very small step from the wording of the
passage to the correct answer.

Start by reiterating what Nosek thinks: the most common and problematic bias in science is
“motivated reasoning”: We interpret observations to fit a particular idea. Psychologists have shown
that “most of our reasoning is in fact rationalization,” he says. (lines 28-32)

Essentially, he’s saying that that scientists draw false conclusions because they are focusing,
on or overemphasizing the data that confirms their biases. The author of the passage also
states in lines 17-18 that most researchers who fall into this trap are unwittingly fooling
themselves - that is, the researchers are themselves unaware of their skewed perception. We
can therefore assume that Nosek’s comments are intended to apply to researchers in that
situation.

Given that context, it is reasonable to assume that Nosek would believe in the importance of
researchers becoming aware of their own biases. After all, scientists who are unaware of
their biases (= preconceptions) obviously cannot take them into account when performing
research, whereas scientists who are attuned to their biases can at least take steps to correct
for them. B) is thus correct.

Playing process of elimination, A) is incorrect because the passage only discusses the
problem of bias in scientific fields - there is no comparison made to other fields.

C) is incorrect because the passage indicates that the problent [of false findings] often begins with
researchers unwittingly fooling themselves (lines 16-17). In other words, the researchers are
unaware that they are distorting the data - the exact opposite of distorting it deliberately.

Note the extreme language in D): fundamentally irrational pursuit. In fact, this assertion is
much too strong: the passage discusses the fact that many individual researchers are prone
to unconscious bias. It does not, however, go so far as to suggest that science itself is
essentially irrational.

174

--- PAGE 174 ---
AMR in So BOERNE NERY AIEEE AS DERE TIL NTA AER AR ERM IEE i,

1.

10

Inference Exercises

Conservationists have historically been at odds
with the people who inhabit wildernesses. During the
last half of the 20th century, millions of indigenous
people were ousted from their homelands to establish
nature sanctuaries free of humans. Most succumbed to
malnutrition, disease and exploitation. Such outcomes —
coupled with the realization that indigenous groups
usually help to stabilize ecosystems by, for instance,
keeping fire at bay—have convinced major conservation
groups to take local human concerns into account. The
World Wildlife Fund (WWF) now describes indigenous
peoples as “natural allies,” and the Nature Conservancy
pledges to seek their “free, informed and prior” consent
to projects impacting their territories.

Chronic stress, it turns out, is extremely dangerous.
While stress doesn’t cause any single disease — in fact,
the causal link between stress and ulcers has been largely
disproved — it makes most diseases significantly worse.

5 The list of ailments connected to stress is staggeringly

10

15

20

25

diverse and includes everything from the common coid
and lower-back pain to Alzheimer’s disease, major
depressive disorder, and heart attack. Stress hollows out
our bones and atrophies our muscles. It triggers adult-
onset diabetes and may also be connected to high blood
pressure. In fact, numerous studies of human longevity
in developed countries have found that psychosocial
factors such as stress are the single most important
variable in determining the length of a life. It’s not that
genes and risk factors like smoking don’t matter. It’s
that our leveis of stress matter more.

Furthermore, the effects of chronic stress directly
counteract improvements in medical care and public
health. Antibiotics, for instance, are far less effective
when our immune system is suppressed by stress; that
fancy heart surgery will work only if the patient can
learn to shed stress. As pioneering stress researcher
Robert Sapolsky notes, “You can give a guy a drug-
coated stent, but if you don’t fix the stress problem, it
won't really matter. For so many conditions, stress is
the major long-term risk factor. Everything else is a
short-term fix,”

175

It can be reasonably inferred from the passage that
conservation groups

A) were initially unaware that indigenous groups
helped maintain ecosystems.

B) have helped millions of indigenous people
remain in their homelands.

C) have gradually become more radical in their
demands.

D) have reduced outbreaks of disease among
indigenous peoples.

The passage suggests that the effects of genes on
human longevity

A) are not yet fully understood.
B) can be altered by certain medications.
C) are less significant than the effects of stress.

D) are entirely irrelevant when compared to the
effects of stress.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 5-6 (“The list...diverse”)

B) Lines 8-9 (“Stress...muscles”)

C) Lines 14-16 (“It’s not...more”)

D) Lines 19-20 (“Antibiotics...stress”)

--- PAGE 175 ---
10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

The following passage is adapted from Jane Austen,
Northanger Abbey, originally published in 1817.

No one who had ever seen Catherine Morland in
her infancy would have supposed her born to be an
heroine. Her situation in life, the character of her father
and mother, her own person and disposition, were ail
equally against her. Her father was a clergyman, without
being neglected, or poor, and a very respectable man,
though his name was Richard—and he had never been
handsome. He had a considerable independence besides
two good livings-—and he was not in the least addicted
to locking up his daughters. Her mother was a woman
of useful plain sense, with a good temper, and, what is
more remarkable, with a good constitution. She had
three sons before Catherine was born; and instead of
dying in bringing the latter into the world, as anybody
might expect, she still lived on—lived to have six
children more—to see them growing up around her,
and to enjoy excellent health herself, A family of ten
children will be always called a fine family, where there
are heads and arms and legs enough for the number;
but the Morlands had little other right to the word, for
they were in general very plain, and Catherine, for
many years of her life, as plain as any. She had a thin
awkward figure, a sallow skin without colour, dark lank
hair, and strong features —so much for her person; and
not less unpropitious for heroism seemed her mind.
She was fond of all boy’s plays, and greatly preferred
cricket not merely to dolls, but to the more heroic
enjoyments of infancy, nursing a dormouse, feeding a
canary-bird, or watering a rose-bush. Indeed she had
no taste for a garden; and if she gathered flowers at all,
it was chiefly for the pleasure of mischief—at least so
it was conjectured from her always preferring those
which she was forbidden to take, Such were her
propensities —her abilities were quite as extraordinary.
She never could learn or understand anything before
she was taught; and sometimes not even then, for
she was often inattentive, and occasionally stupid.

Her mother was three months in teaching her only

to repeat the “Beggar’s Petition”; and after all, her

next sister, Sally, could say it better than she did.

Not that Catherine was always stupid—by no means,
she learnt the fable of “The Hare and Many Friends” as
quickly as any girl in England. Her mother wished her
to learn music; and Catherine was sure she should like it,
for she was very fond of tinkling the keys of the old
forlorn spinner; so, at eight years old she began. She
learnt a year, and could not bear it; and Mrs. Morland,
who did not insist on her daughters being accomplished

176

in spite of incapacity or distaste, allowed her to leave
off. The day which dismissed the music-master was
one of the happiest of Catherine's life. Her taste for
drawing was not superior; though whenever she could
obtain the outside of a letter from her mother or seize
upon any other odd piece of paper, she did what she
could in that way, by drawing houses and trees, hens
and chickens, all very much like one another, Writing
and accounts she was taught by her father, French

by her mother: her proficiency in either was not
remarkable, and she shirked her lessons in both
whenever she could. What a strange, unaccountable
character! —for with al] these symptoms of profligacy
at ten years old, she had neither a bad heart nor a bad
temper, was seldom stubborn, scarcely ever
quarrelsome, and very kind to the little ones, with
few interruptions of tyranny; she was moreover noisy
and wild, hated confinement and cleanliness, and
loved nothing so well in the world as rolling down the
green slope at the back of the house.

50

55

60

65

An unstated assumption in the narrator’s

description of Catherine is that a heroine is
typically

A)
B)
C)
D)

bold and daring.
brilliant and beautiful.
wild and rebellious.

independent and carefree.

The narrator suggests that Catherine’s mother
responded to her daughter’s behavior with

A) frequent irritation.
B) general indifference.
C) easy indulgence.
D) utter perplexity.

--- PAGE 176 ---
Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 13-15 (“and...on”)
B) Lines 20-21 (“for...plain”
C) Lines 38-40 (“Her...did’’)
D) Lines 47-50 (“and...off’)

The narrator implies that Catherine was strongly
motivated to do things that

A) were unusually difficult.

B) were taught by her parents.

C) were not permitted.

D) her siblings were unable to accomplish.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the

answer to the previous question?
A) Lines 26-27 (“She...dolls’)

B) Lines 30-33 (“and...take”)

; C) Lines 43-44 (“Her...music’”)

D) Lines 54-56 (“she...another’’)

The narrator’s references to a dormouse, canary-

bird, and rose bush (lines 28-29) most strongly
suggest that Catherine

A) could behave in a cruel manner.
B) preferred to play alone than with other

Z children.

\ C) rejected a range of conventionally feminine
; activities.

} D)_ was aware of her exceptional behavior.

|

5

177

--- PAGE 177 ---
10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

The following passage is adapted from Wiebke
Brauer, “The Miracle of Space,” © 2014 by Smart
Magazine.

Imagine a world where you share the available
space with others: without signs, sidewalks, or bicycle
lanes. A vision otherwise known as shared space —
and one that becomes more and more relevant with
the crowding of our cities. While this might sound like
urban science fiction or, possibly, impending chaos
mixed with survival of the fittest, this particular
concept is the declared dream of many traffic planners.

Shared space means streets freed of signs and
signals; streets solely governed by right of way, leaving
road users to their own devices. In order to restructure
public space, it removes all superfluous interventions
and contradictory guidelines, Many countries are
currently in the process of installing — or at least
discussing — such ‘Jawless’ areas: Germany and the
Netherlands, Denmark and the UK, Switzerland and
the USA, but also Australia and New Zealand.

One could argue that shared spaces have been
around for a long time, simply under different terms
and titles. Back in the 1970s, for example, residents
enjoyed mixed traffic areas, traffic calming, and play
streets. And yet, these were not quite the same:

Shared space involves a new and radical push for equal
rights of all road users, pedestrian and otherwise. And
while it was British urban designer Ben Hamilton-
Baillie who coined the actual term, the concept itself
was developed in the mid-1990s under former Dutch
traffic manager Hans Monderman. Shortly before his
death in 2006, Monderman explained the basic tenets
of shared space as such: “The problem with traffic
engineers is that when there’s a problem with a road,
they always try fo add something. To my mind, it’s
much better to remove things.”

Indeed, studies have shown that in many places —
where signs and traffic lights have been removed and
where each and every one is responsible for their own
actions in ungoverned space — the rate of accidents
goes down. The reason: the traditional strict separation
between cars, cyclists, and pedestrians encourages
clashes at crossings. And although shared space
requires cars to lower their speed, it also cuts down
on journey times since it encourages a continuous
flow of traffic instead of bringing tt to a halt through
traffic signals.

Monderman was utterly convinced that shared space
would work anywhere in the world because, underneath
it all, people are basically the same, despite any cultural
differences. In an interview, he stated that “emotions
and issues are the same everywhere. You should be able

178

50 to read a street like a book. If you insist on
constantly guiding people and treating them like
idiots, you shouldn’t be surprised if they act like
idiots after a while.”

At the same time, the threat of looming idiocy
is not the most pressing reason for a future traffic
management rethink. Recent city planning, for
example, has evolved along the same lines around
the world: think highways and flyovers dissecting the
city’s natural fabric, dedicated pedestrian zones, and
60 large shopping malls. Clear-cut boundaries between
driving, work, life, and shopping are emphasized by
a thicket of signs. The result: ultimate, well-ordered
bleakness. At night, you might find yourself in an
empty, soulless pedestrian zone. A lot of the time,
urbanization simply translates as uniformity.

In recent years, however, city and traffic planners
have decided to tackle this issue with “road space
attractiveness” measures to breathe new spirit into
lifeless satellite towns. Their goal: a new definition
70 of space and mobility against the background that

the notion of “might is right” — and only if those in

power stick to the rules — is more than outdated,

The unregulated and unorthodox approach of shared

space makes it obvious to each and every individual
75 that this concept requires cooperation, that sharing

is the new having.
Critics of Monderman and Hamilton-Baillie

have voiced that no rules implies the inevitable

return of “might is right.” Yet who says that chaos
80 reigns in the absence of order? That’s a questionable

statement. Shared space certainly requires a new
mindset and we can’t expect a swift shift away from
traditional traffic planning — bigger, further, faster,
But the vision of no more set traffic cycles, fewer
85 linear and predefined patterns, of freely flowing and
intermingling participants in an open and boundless
space, is equally unfettered and fascinating. A vision
in the spirit of Pericles who wrote around 450 BC
that “you need freedom for happiness and courage
90 for freedom.”

55

65

--- PAGE 178 ---
ALUMINA ANA

semana

LSTRaM ea Spent

AOE S i es ROPREMINT ARAB Hey

RR Cael TeR es

SLEEPER ELSE RADE SRE OE He OIE

a
:
x
i

The passage suggests that the most pressing reason
for overhauling the way traffic is managed is that

A) the removal of traffic signal results in more
varied and vibrant urban spaces.

B) drivers are unlikely to take responsibility for
their actions when they are left alone.

C) overreliance on traffic signals makes drivers
hesitant and indecisive.

D) accidents are more likely to occur when
traffic signals are present.

Based on the passage, it is reasonable to infer
that those in charge of planning traffic

A) are strongly opposed to Hans Monderman’s
proposal.

B) believe that drivers’ behavior does not vary
across cultures.

C) believe that abolishing traffic signals would
lead to chaos.

D) are frequently opposed to the use of traffic
signals.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 7-8 (“this...planners”)
B) Lines 20-22 (“Back...streets’”)
C) Lines 50-53 (“If... while”)

D) Lines 56-58 (“Recent...world’)

179

--- PAGE 179 ---
5. This passage is from Samuel Gompers, “What Does the
Working Man Want?” 1890. Gompers, a Scottish Immigrant,
was the founder of the American Federation of Labor
and helped workers to organize and fight for fairer
working conditions.

My friends, we have met here today to celebrate
the idea that has prompted thousands of working-people
of Louisville and New Albany to parade the streets;
that prompts the toilers of Chicago to turn out by their
5 fifty or hundred thousand of men; that prompts the vast
army of wage-workers in New York to demonstrate
their enthusiasm and appreciation of the importance of
this idea; that prompts the toilers of England, Ireland,
Germany, France, Italy, Spain, and Austria to defy the
manifestos of the autocrats of the world and say that
on May the first, 1890, the wage-workers of the world
will lay down their tools in sympathy with the wage-
workers of America, to establish a principle of
limitations of hours of labor to eight hours for sleep,
eight hours for work, and eight hours for what we will.
It has been charged time and again that were we
to have more hours of leisure we would merely devote
it to the cultivation of vicious habits. They tell us that
the eight-hour movement can not be enforced, for the
reason that it must check industrial and commercial
progress. I say that the history of this shows the reverse.
I say that is the plane on which this question ought
to be discussed —that is the social question. As long as
they make this question an economic one, I am willing to
discuss it with them. I would retrace every step J have
taken to advance this movement did it mean industrial
and commercial stagnation. But it does not mean that.
It means greater prosperity; it means a greater degree of
progress for the whole people.
They say they can’t afford it. Is that true? Let us
see for one moment. If a reduction in the hours of labor
causes industrial and commercial] ruination, it would
naturally follow increased hours of labor would
increase the prosperity, commercial and industrial.
If that were true, England and America ought to be at
the tail end, and China at the head of civilization.
Why, when you reduce the hours of labor, just
think what it means. Suppose men who work ten
hours a day had the time lessened to nine, or men who
40 work nine hours a day have it reduced to eight; what
does it mean? It means millions of golden hours and
opportunities for thought. Some men might say you will
go to sleep. Well, the ordinary man might try to sleep
sixteen hours a day, but he would soon find he could
not do it long. He would probably become interested in
some study and the hours that have been taken from
manual labor are devoted to mental labor, and the

10

415

20

25

30

35

45

180

mental labor of one hour produce for him more wealth
than the physical labor of a dozen hours.

I maintain that this is a true proposition—that
men under the short-hour system not only have
opportunity to improve themselves, but to make a
greater degree of prosperity for their employers.
Why, my friends, how is it in China, how is it in
Spain, how is it in India and Russia, how is it in Italy?
Cast your eye throughout the universe and observe the
industry that forces nature to yield up its fruits to man’s
necessities, and you will find that where the hours of
labor are the shortest the progress of invention in
machinery and the prosperity of the people are the
greatest. It has only been under the great influence of
our great republic, were our people have exhibited
their great senses, that we can move forward, upward
and onward, and are watched with interest in our
movements of progress and reform.

50

55

60

65

Based on the passage, Gompers implies that in
comparison to workers in the United States,
workers in China (line 36)

A)
B)
C)
D)

enjoy greater prosperity.
are more industrious.
spend more hours at work.

are less fairly compensated.

Gompers suggests that one of the main
consequences of long working hours in the
United States is that

A)
B)
C)
D)

civic participation is reduced.

important discoveries go unmade.

workers are too exhausted to perform their jobs.
the quality of work declines.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines {6-18 (“It... habits”)

B) Lines 22-23 (“I...question”)

C) Lines 31-34 (“If...industrial’’)

D) Lines 46-49 (“the hours... hours”)

--- PAGE 180 ---
f
E
4
M7
5
i

RRS REIN ia

LS Ya Rng ROR RE

gS eit RRO

AM CME ARE Li OE iy pe 3 RPA OPIN gts OMNES.

A opuptaniscrenminan tage,

3
Fi
‘
&
g
‘
4
4

>

be ATMA AT NIT ee eiiioats

6.

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

The following passage is adapted from Michael Anft,
“Solving the Mystery of Death Valley's Walking Rocks,”
© 2011 by Johns Hopkins Magazine.

For six decades, observers have been confounded
by the movement of large rocks across a dry lake bed
in California’s Death Valley National Park. Leaving
flat trails behind them, rocks that weigh up to 100
pounds seemingly do Michael Jackson’s moonwalk
across the valley’s sere, cracked surface, sometimes
traveling more than 100 yards. Without a body of water
to pick them up and move them, the rocks at Racetrack
Playa, a flat space between the valley’s high cliffs,
have been the subject of much speculation, including
whether they have been relocated by human pranksters
or space aliens. The rocks have become the desert
equivalent of Midwestern crop circles. “They really are
a curiosity,” says Ralph Lorenz, a planetary scientist at
the Applied Physics Laboratory. “Some [people] have
mentioned UFOs. But I’ve always believed that this is
something science could solve.”

It has tried. One theory holds that the rocks are
blown along by powerful winds. Another posits that
the wind pushes thin sheets of ice, created when the
desert’s temperatures dip low enough to freeze water
from a rare rainstorm, and the rocks go along for the
ride, But neither theory is rock solid. Winds at the playa
aren’t strong enough—some scientists believe that
they’d have to be 100 miles per hour or more —to blow
the rocks across the valley. And rocks subject to the
“ice sailing theory” wouldn’t create trails as they
moved.

Lorenz and a team of investigators believe that a
combination of forces may work to rearrange
Racetrack Playa’s rocks. “We saw that it would take a
lot of wind to move these rocks, which are larger than
you’d expect wind to move,” Lorenz explains. “That
led us to this idea that ice might be picking up the
rocks and floating them.” As they explained in the
January issue of The American Journal of Physics,
instead of moving along with wind-driven sheets of
ice, the rocks may instead be lifted by the ice, making
them more subject to the wind’s force. The key, Lorenz
says, is that the lifting by an “ice collar” reduces
friction with the ground, to the point that the wind now
has enough force to move the rock. The rock moves,
the ice doesn’t, and because part of the rock juts
through the ice, it marks the territory it has covered.
Lorenz’s team came to its conclusion through a
combination of intuition, lab work, and observation—
not that the last part was easy. Watching the rocks
travel is a bit like witnessing the rusting of a hubcap.
Instances of movement are rare and last for only a few

181

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

seconds. Lorenz’s team placed low-resolution cameras
on the cliffs (which are about 30 miles from the nearest
paved road) to take pictures once per hour. For the past
three winters, the researchers have weathered extreme
temperatures and several flat tires to measure how
often the thermometer dips below freezing, how often
the playa gets rain and floods, and the strength of the
winds. “The measurements seem to back up our
hypothesis,” he says. “Any of the theories may be true
at any one time, but ice rafting may be the best explan-
ation for the trails we’ve been seeing. We’ve seen trails
like this documented in Arctic coastal areas, and the
mechanism is somewhat similar. A belt of ice sur-
rounds a boulder during high tide, picks it up, and then
drops it elsewhere.” His “ice raft theory” was also
borne out by an experiment that used the ingenuity of a
high school science fair. Lorenz placed a basalt pebble
in a Tupperware container with water so that the
pebble projected just above the surface. He then turned
the container upside down in a baking tray filled with a
layer of coarse sand at its base, and put the whole thing
in his home freezer. The rock’s “keel” (its protruding
part) projected downward into the sand, which simu-
lated the cracked surface of the playa (which scientists
call “Special K” because of its resemblance to cereal
flakes). A gentle push or slight puff of air caused the
Tupperware container to move, just as an ice raft
would under the right conditions. The pebble made a
trail in the soft sand. “It was primitive but effective,”
Lorenz says of the experiment. Lorenz has spent the
last 20 years studying Titan, a moon of Saturn. He says
that Racetrack Playa’s surface mirrors that of a dried
lakebed on Titan. Observations and experiments on
Earth may yield clues to that moon’s geology. “We
also may get some idea of how climate affects

85 geology —particularly as the climate changes here on

90

95

Earth,” Lorenz says. ‘““When we study other planets and
their moons, we’re forced to use Occam’s razor —
sometimes the simplest answer is best, which means
you look to Earth for some answers. Once you get out
there on Earth, you realize how strange so much of its
surface is. So, you have to figure there’s weird stuff to
be found on Titan as well.” Whether that’s true or not
will take much more investigation. He adds: “One day,
we’ ll figure all this out, For the moment, the moving
rock present a wonderful problem to study ina
beautiful place.”

--- PAGE 181 ---
It is reasonable to conclude that one of the scientists’
goals in studying Racetrack Playa was to

A) investigate how life could be supported on
Titan,

B) understand the effects of climate change.
C) understand the geology of a range of planets.
D) discover the limitations of wind power.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 23-26 (“Winds... valley”)

B) Lines 52-57 (“For...\winds”)

C) Lines 75-77 (“A gentle...conditions”)
D) Lines 83-86 (“We...Earth”)

The passage implies that scientists rejected the
theory that the rocks were carried on sheets of ice
pushed by the wind because

A) the winds were too weak to move the rocks.
B) the rocks left a trace of their movement.
C) rock is too dense to be moved by wind.

D) the rocks had too much friction with the
ground.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
ansiver to the previous question?

A) Lines 26-28 (“And... moved”)

B) Lines 37-39 (“‘instead...force’’)

C) Lines 49-50 (“Instances...seconds”)
D) Lines 62-64 (“A belt...elsewhere’’)

182

--- PAGE 182 ---
Se RE EE

—————— oe

‘
:
s
:
i

me OS SAAN

SEEN BT SAI SOAS IS 3 SAME BRAY HN EERE BG ts Pan NaN
Sal } "a

:

3
i
:
:
i
5
4

a i AmO VGN MALE B00 ASL ARRIETA 06g EINE AY ARRIOLA IMCL INI BEEE

‘cette LANM NAM ems Sas PBS ANP 3

7. The following passage is adapted from “Makerspaces,
Hackerspaces, and Community Scale Production in
Detroit and Beyond,” © 2013 by Sean Ansanelli.

During the mid-1980s, spaces began to emerge
across Europe where computer hackers could convene
for mutual support and camaraderie. In the past few
years, the idea of fostering such shared, physical spaces

5 has been rapidly adapted by the diverse and growing
community of “makers,” who seek to apply the idea of
“hacking” to physical objects, processes, or anything
else that can be deciphered and improved upon.

A hackerspace is described by hackerspaces.org as

10 a “community-operated physical space where people
with common interests, often in computers, technology,
science, digital art or electronic art, can meet, socialize,
and/or collaborate.” Such spaces can vary in size,
available technology, and membership structure (some

15 being completely open), but generally share community-
oriented characteristics. Indeed, while the term
“hacker” can sometimes have negative connotations,
modern hackerspaces thrive off of community,
openness, and assimilating diverse viewpoints — these

20 often being the only guiding principles in otherwise
informal organizational structures.

In recent years, the city of Detroit has emerged
as a hotbed for hackerspaces and other DIY
(“Do-It-Yourself”) experiments. Several hackerspaces

25 can already be found throughout the city and several
more are currently in formation. Of course, Detroit's
attractiveness for such projects can be partially
attributed to cheap real estate, which allows aspiring
hackers to acquire ample space for experimentation.

30 Some observers have also described this kind of making
and tinkering as embedded in the DNA of Detroit’s
residents, who are able to harness substantial
intergenerational knowledge and attract like-minded
individuals.

35 _Hackerspaces (or “makerspaces”) can be found in
more commercial forms, but the vast majority of spaces
are self-organized and not-for-profit. For example, the
OmniCorp hackerspace operates off member fees to
cover rent and new equipment, from laser cutters to

40 welding tools. OmniCorp also hosts an “open hack
night” every Thursday in which the space is open to
the general public. Potential members are required to
attend at least one open hack night prior to a consensus
vote by the existing members for admittance; no

45 prospective members have yet been denied.

A visit to one of OmniCorp’s open hack nights
reveals the vast variety of activity and energy existing
in the space. In the main common room alone, activities
range from experimenting with sound installations and

183

50 learning to program Arduino boards to building
speculative “oloid” shapes ~ all just for the sake of it.
With a general atmosphere of mutual support,
participants in the space are continually encouraged
to help others.

55 One of the most active community-focused initiatives
in the city is the Mt. Elliot Makerspace. Jeff Sturges,
former MIT Media Lab Fellow and Co-Founder of
OmniCorp, started the Mt. Elliot project with the aim of
replicating MIT’s Fab Lab model on a smaller, cheaper

60 scale in Detroit. “Fab Labs” are production facilities that
consist of a small collection of flexible computer-
controlled tools that cover several different scales and
various materials, with the aim to make “almost
anything” (including other machines). The Mt. Elliot

65 Makerspace now offers youth-based skill development
programs in eight areas: Transportation, Electronics,
Digital Tools, Wearables, Design and Fabrication, Food,
Music, and Arts. The range of activities is meant to
provide not only something for everyone, but a well-

70 rounded base knowledge of making to all participants.

While the center receives some foundational support,
the space also derives significant support from the local
community, Makerspaces throughout the city connect
the space’s youth-based programming directly to

75 school curriculums.

The growing interest in and development of
hacker/makerspaces has been explained, in part, as a
result of the growing maker movement. Through the
combination of cultural norms and communication

80 channels from open source production as well as
increasingly available technologies for physical
production, amateur maker communities have developed
in virtual and physical spaces.

Publications such as Wired are noticing the

85 transformative potential of this emerging movement
and have sought to devote significant attention to its
development. Chief editor Chris Anderson recently
published a book entitled Makers, in which he proclaims
that the movement will become the next Industrial

90 Revolution. Anderson argues such developments will
allow for a new wave of business opportunities by
providing mass-customization rather than mass-
production.

The transformative potential of these trends goes
95 beyond new business opportunities or competitive
advantages for economic growth. Rather, these trends
demonstrate the potential to actually transform
economic development models entirely.

--- PAGE 183 ---
Based on the passage, it can be reasonably inferred
that hackerspaces are organized in a manner that is

A) strictly regulated.

B) wild and chaotic.

C) informal and accommodating.
D) rigid and hierarchical.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 3-6 (“In...makers”)

B) Lines 18-21 (“modern...structures”)
C) Lines 35-37 (“Hackerspaces...profit’”’)
D) Lines 46-48 (“A visit...space’’)

The author implies that one potential challenge for
new hackerspaces involves

A) zoning restrictions.
B) lack of publicity,
C) local protests.

D) property costs.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 16-17 (“Indeed...connotations”)
B) Lines 26-29 (“Of...experimentation”)
C) Lines 37-40 (“For...tools”)

D) Lines 71-73 (“While..,community”)

184

--- PAGE 184 ---
i
3
}
i
g
z

PURE IEEE IAEA EES ELD LEDGER EPID LR OEE AONE

ar ae hvintiee

be ARATE ALY BIR AAMT NG RRS RY gh RGN TEES

tea RENNIN elas

Watery OOP EOD ANAM RIOR ROBES ALY 1420 AK:

8.

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

The following passage is adapted from Julian Jackson,
“New Research Suggests Dinosaurs Were Warm-Blooded
and Active” © 2011 by Julian Jackson.

New research from the University of Adelaide has
added to the debate about whether dinosaurs were cold-
blooded and sluggish or warm-blooded and active.
Professor Roger Seymour from the University's School
of Earth & Environmental Sciences has applied the
latest theories of human and animal anatomy and
physiology to provide insight into the lives of
dinosaurs.

Human thigh bones have tiny holes ~ known as the
“nutrient foramen” — on the shaft that supply blood to
living bone cells inside. New research has shown that
the size of those holes is related to the maximum rate
that a person can be active during aerobic exercise.
Professor Seymour has used this principle to evaluate
the activity levels of dinosaurs.

“Far from being lifeless, bone cells have a relatively
high metabolic rate and they therefore require a large
blood supply to deliver oxygen. On the inside of the
bone, the blood supply comes usually from a single
artery and vein that pass through a hole on the shaft —
the nutrient foramen,” he says.

Professor Seymour wondered whether the size of
the nutrient foramen might indicate how much blood
was necessary to keep the bones in good repair. For
example, highly active animals might cause more bone
‘microfractures,’ requiring more frequent repairs by the
bone cells and therefore a greater blood supply. “My
aim was to see whether we could use fossil bones of
dinosaurs to indicate the level of bone metabolic rate
and possibly extend it to the whole body's metabolic
rate,” he says. “One of the big controversies among
paleobiologists is whether dinosaurs were cold-blooded
and sluggish or warm-blooded and active. Could the
size of the foramen be a possible gauge for dinosaur
metabolic rate?”

Comparisons were made with the sizes of the holes
in living mammals and reptiles, and their metabolic
rates. Measuring mammals ranging from mice to
elephants, and reptiles from lizards to crocodiles, one
of Professor Seymour's Honors students, Sarah Smith,
combed the collections of Australian museums,
photographing and measuring hundreds of tiny holes in
thigh bones.

“The results were unequivocal. The sizes of the holes
were related closely to the maximum metabolic rates
during peak movement in mammals and reptiles,”
Professor Seymour says. “The holes found in mammals
were about !0 times larger than those in reptiles.”

185

These holes were compared to those of fossil

50 dinosaurs. Dr. Don Henderson, Curator of
Dinosaurs from the Royal Tyrrell Museum in
Alberta, Canada, and Daniela Schwarz-Wings from
the Museum fiir Naturkunde Humboldt University
Berlin, Germany measured the holes in 10 species of

55 dinosaurs from five different groups, including
bipedal and quadrupedal carnivores and herbivores,
weighing 50kg to 20,000kg.

“On a relative comparison to eliminate the

differences in body size, all of the dinosaurs had

60 holes in their thigh bones larger than those of
mammals,” Professor Seymour says.

“The dinosaurs appeared to be even more active
than the mammals. We certainly didn't expect to see
that. These results provide additional weight to

65 theories that dinosaurs were warm-blooded and
highly active creatures, rather than cold-blooded
and sluggish.”

Professor Seymour says following the results of
this study, it’s likely that a simple measurement of

70 foramen size could be used to evaluate maximum
activity levels in other vertebrate animals.

Based on the passage, it can be reasonably

inferred that a creature with a small foramen
would most likely be

A) cold-blooded.
B) warm-blooded.
C) smaller than average.
D) larger than average.

An unstated assumption in the passage is that

A) warm- or cold-bloodedness cannot be
determined by an animal’s activity level.

B) some prehistoric creatures were physiologically
similar to modern ones.

C) foramen size can be an unreliable indicator
of activity level.

D) mammal bones are significantly larger than
reptile bones.

--- PAGE 185 ---
Explanations: Inference Exercises

4.1A

This question does not provide a line reference, but the passage gives you a subtle clue of where
to look. The most “interesting” punctuation it contains is a set of dashes (lines 5-8), and the
information between them provides you with the information necessary to answer the question.
The statement that conservation groups came to the realization that indigenous groups usually help to
stabilize ecosystems implies that the groups were not always aware of that fact — in other words,
they were unaware of indigenous groups’ ability to stabilize (= maintain) ecosystems. B) and D)
are incorrect because the passage indicates exactly the opposite: millions of indigenots people were
ousted (forced) from their homelands because of conservationists’ efforts to create human-free
zones, and many of them succuinbed to disease. C) is entirely unsupported by the passage.

2,1-2C,C

The passage focuses on stress, so it is logical to assume that the correct answer to 2.1 will be
related to that topic. That makes C) and D) the likeliest answers. In D), however, the extreme
phrase “entirely irrelevant” suggests that this answer is wrong. When you go through the line
references for 2.2, your key word is “genes.” Lines 5-6, 8-9, and 19-20 all mention stress, but only
14-16 mention genes. What do those lines tell us? That levels of stress matter more [than genes and
risk factors like smoking]. In other words, genes and risky behaviors matter less. C) is thus correct.

3.1B

Throughout the passage, the narrator describes the various ways in which Catherine is unsuited
to being a heroine, so it can be inferred that a heroine should be all of the things that Catherine is
not. One of the major points of the passage is that Catherine is a less-than-brilliant student who
prefers to blow off her lessons. It can thus be inferred that a heroine should be very intelligent
and/or studious. Likewise, lines 22-24 indicate that Catherine is plain, whereas heroines are
typically beautiful. The other answers refer to attributes that could be associated with Catherine.

3.2-3 C, D

If you know that Mrs. Morland is generally good-natured, you can identify C) as the correct
answer to 3.2 because it is the only positive option. Otherwise, start by plugging in the line
references, looking for information that suggests how Mrs. Morland responded to Catherine’s
antics. Lines 13-15 are unrelated to that topic, so A) can be eliminated. Lines 20-21 focus on the
Morlands’ physical appearance, and lines 38-40 say nothing about Mrs. Morland’s reaction to the
length of time it took Catherine to learn the “Beggar's Petition,” so B) and C) can also be
eliminated, D) is the answer to 3.3 because lines 47-50 indicate that Mrs. Morland allowed
Catherine to stop music lessons, suggesting that she responded to her daughter's lack of
brilliance/ perseverance without a fuss. That corresponds most directly to C) in 3.2,

3.4-5 C, B

If you understand the passage well enough to know that Catherine is somewhat naughty, you
can reasonably assume that the answer to 3.4 is C), Then, you can plug in the line references to
3.5, looking for statements to support that idea. Otherwise, the question is broad enough that you
are best off plugging in the line references, looking for information about what most motivates
Catherine. Lines 26-27 indicate she preferred boys’ games, but no answer in 3.4 corresponds to
that idea. Lines 30-33 correctly suggest Catherine’s propensity for doing things that were
forbidden, i.e, not allowed, making C) the answer to 3.4. Lines 43-44 and 54-56 do not provide
information that supports an answer in 3.4.

186

--- PAGE 186 ---
}
Fy
%
t
4
i
i

3
y
;
:
©
ig
Fy
$
Fi
Fi
x
iA
4
2
i
:
F
:
g
4
Pa
:

PROF Sesh BOLI DR ee

PE AREA OM REIMAN SI ge ROE WETTIG ORY ENIAC STAN ENE OS 8 PEROT

tO AF 25 ass

bee SUNN A CON SHINY Rite

3.6 C

The point of the sentence in which the references to a dormouse, canary-bird, and rose bush
appear (lines 28-29) is that Catherine preferred boys’ games. That is just another way of saying
that she “rejected conventionally feminine activities.”

4.4A

Using the big picture, you might be able to eliminate B) in 4.1 upfront; the passage indicates that
drivers are more likely to take responsibility for their behavior in the absence of traffic signals.
The other answers in 4.1 are all ideas included in the passage - the question is which one the
author considers “most pressing.” That is your key phrase, and it appears in line 55. A) is correct
because lines 54-56 state that Af the same tinie, the threat of looming idiocy is not the most pressing
reason for a future traffic management rethink. The implication is that the information that follows
will indicate the most pressing reason for a traffic management rethink. What information
follows? A description of bland, soulless urban spaces that could be revitalized by the elimination
of traffic divisions. That corresponds to A).

4.2-3D,A

The question in 4.2 provides very little direction, so start by plugging in line references - you'll
find the answer almost immediately. Lines 7-8 state that this concept is the declared dream of many
traffic planners. What does “this concept” refer to? A world without signs, sidewalks, or bicycle lanes.
In other words, most traffic planners agree with Monderman that traffic signals should be
abolished. The answer to 4.2 is therefore D), and the answer to 4.3 is A).

5.1 C

The sentence in which the word China appears states that If that were true, England and America
ought to be at the tail end, and China at the head of civilization. To figure out what that refers to, you
must back up and read the beginning of the paragraph. That section states that if fewer working
hours caused a decline in national prosperity, then more hours would increase prosperity. The
statement that China [would be] at the head of civilization if national prosperity resulted from long
working hours implies that Chinese workers put in very long hours. C) is thus correct.

§.2-3 B, D

This is a general enough question that you are best off plugging in the line references in 5.3,
unless you happen to remember the answer to 5.2. In lines 16-18, It has been charged indicates that
Gompers is citing the conventional wisdom ~ that is, what he does not believe. Eliminate A). B)
and C) are incorrect because lines 22-23 and 31-34 do not discuss the consequences of long working
hours. D) is correct because lines 46-49 suggest that workers could make important discoveries if
they were given more free time (the mental labor of one hour produces for him more wealth than the
physical labor of a dozen hours). The answer to 5.2 is therefore B), and the answer to 5.3 is D).

6.1-2 B, D

If you remember the discussion of Titan from the passage, you might be tempted to pick A) - but
be careful! None of the lines provided in 6.2 supports the idea that the scientists were attempting
to understand how Titan could support life. In fact, the passage only directly indicates that
scientists wanted to understand Titan’s geology (lines 82-83). So plug in the line references from
6.2, The only set of lines to directly support an answer in 6.1 is D): in lines 83-86, Lorenz states
that We may also may get some idea of how climate affects geology ~ particularly as the climate changes
here on Earth. It can thus be inferred that one of his goals in conducting research on Racetrack
Playa is to understand the potential effects of climate change.

187

--- PAGE 187 ---
6.3-4 B,A

6.3 is phrased in a somewhat complicated manner, so start by rephrasing the question to make
sure you're clear on what it’s asking. You might say something like, “Why did scientists reject the
theory that the rocks were carried on ice?” It’s unlikely you'll remember the answer, so start by
plugging in. Lines 26-28 give you the answer immediately - the only challenge is to recognize
that they give you the answer. These lines refer to the “ice-sailing theory,” and in order to
recognize that this theory posits that the rocks were carried on ice (lines 19-23), you must back up
and read the full paragraph. What does the passage indicate about the weakness in that theory?
The passage states that rocks moved by ice wouldi’t create trails as they moved. Logically, then,
scientists rejected the ice-sailing theory because the Racetrack Playa rocks did leave trails. That is
what B) says, so it is the answer to 6.3, and A) is the answer to 6.4.

7.1-2C,B

One of the major points that the author makes about makerspaces/hackerspaces is that they’re
flexible and open/non-exclusive. If you have that big-picture understanding, you can
immediately identify C) as the most likely answer to 7.1 and then check the line references in 7.2
to confirm. Otherwise, start by plugging in the line references. A) is incorrect because lines 3-6
only describe the community of “makers” themselves (diverse and growing) ~ they do not
describe how makerspaces are organized. B) is the answer to 7.2 because lines 18-21 indicate that
community, openness, and assimilating diverse viewpoints are often these spaces’ only guiding
principles. In other words, the organizations are loosely structured. In 7.1, B) is too extreme:
having a loose structure is not the same thing as being “wild and chaotic.” D) is exactly the
opposite of what the passage describes - makerspaces are informal and egalitarian, not “rigid” or
“hierarchical” (having a strict chain of command). C) is thus the best fit for 7.1.

7.3-4D,B

This is a real detail-based question, so it’s unlikely you'll remember the answer to 7.3. Work by
plugging in from 7.4. A) is incorrect because lines 16-17 only state that the term “hacking” can
have negative connotations; they don’t indicate any particular challenge to hackerspaces
consistent with an answer in 7.3. B) is subtle but correct. Lines 26-29 indicate that Detroit is
particularly well-suited to fostering hackerspaces because of cheap real estate, implying that
(higher) real estate costs could pose an obstacle to hackerspace growth elsewhere. The answer to
7.3 is thus D). Nothing in either lines 37-40 or 71-73 directly supports any of the answers in 7.3.

8.1A

Consider the passage and Seymour’s experiment as a whole: the primary hypothesis was that
because warm-bloodedness is associated with large holes in the bone (high metabolic rate), the
presence of large bone holes in dinosaurs would indicate warm-bloodedness. Logically, the
opposite would hold true as well: small holes in the bone would indicate cold-bloodedness, That
is what A) says, so it is correct.

8.2B

The premise of Seymour's study was that foramen size could be studied as an indicator of
metabolic level in dinosaurs (prehistoric creatures) because foramen size could be studied as an
accurate indicator of metabolic level in reptiles and mammals (present-day creatures). In order
for the findings to be meaningful, the bodies of prehistoric creatures must have functioned in a
way that was similar to the bodies of modern-day creatures. That is essentially what B) says, so it
is correct.

188

--- PAGE 188 ---
&
2
5
§
Z

i
:
|
i

$
5
z
3

ae

eb egg ENN ATONE aE RIN EASIER

t
:
\

Ieee BAtlas SONIC EERIE IT Cla ANIL I ME

Sto inom dh MA? one ce WANE ene RANE aN

woe tc vec Mic0e oe OSE:

Extended Reasoning
and Analogies

The vast majority of inference questions that appear on the SAT are similar to the ones we
looked at in the previous chapter - that is, their correct answers either rephrase the
information in the passage from a different angle, or directly state information that the
passage implies but does not explicitly convey.

In a small number of cases, however, you may be asked to make larger inferences, ones that
require you to extend your reasoning beyond the passage itself.

These questions take two major forms:

The first type asks you to use the information from the passage to determine how a figure
discussed in the passage would mostly likely respond to a hypothetical situation - that is,
one not discussed in the passage. These are essentially assumption questions taken one step
further: you must be able to identify the underlying logic in order to apply it to a new
situation. You can expect to encounter one, perhaps two, of these questions per test.

The second type consists of analogy questions, which ask you to identify the answer
containing a scenario that is “most analogous to,” “most similar to,” or “most like,” the
scenario described in a short section of the passage. Analogy questions do not appear on
every exam and should therefore not be a major concern; however, you should have a
general idea of how to work through them in case you encounter one.

On the next page, we're going to start by looking at the first type.

189

--- PAGE 189 ---
Sometimes it seems surprising that science
functions at all. In 2005, medical science was shaken
by a paper with the provocative title “Why most
published research findings are false.” Written by John

5 loannidis, a professor of medicine at Stanford University,

it didn’t actually show that any particular result was
wrong. Instead, it showed that the statistics of reported
positive findings was not consistent with how often one
should expect to find them, As loannidis concluded more

10 recently, “many published research findings are false or

exaggerated, and an estimated 85 percent of research
resources are wasted.”

It’s likely that some researchers are consciously
cherry-picking data to get their work published.

15 And some of the problems surely lie with journal

publication policies. But the problems of false findings
often begin with researchers unwittingly fooling

I
i
i
}

Based on the passage, to which of the following

situations would Nosek most likely object?

A) A team of researchers knowingly publishes
misleading information in an attempt to obtain
funding.

B) A team of researchers publishes a study
based on statistics that were not independently
verified,

C) A researcher deliberately publishes a study
whose results conflict with those obtained by
experts in the field.

D) A researcher who is known to believe in

paranormal activity publishes a study that
supports its existence.

themselves: they fall prey to cognitive biases, common
modes of thinking that lure us toward wrong but

20 convenient or attractive conclusions. “Seeing the
reproducibility rates in psychology and other empirical
science, we can safely say that something is not working
out the way it should,” says Susann Fiedler, a behavioral
economist at the Max Planck Institute for Research on

25 Collective Goods in Bonn, Germany. “Cognitive biases
might be one reason for that.”

Psychologist Brian Nosek of the University of
Virginia says that the most common and problematic
bias in science is “motivated reasoning”: We interpret

30 observations to fit a particular idea. Psychologists have
shown that “most of our reasoning is in fact
rationalization,” he says. In other words, we have already
made the decision about what to do or to think, and our
“explanation” of our reasoning is really a justification for

35 doing what we wanted to do—or to believe—anyway.
Science is of course meant to be more objective and
skeptical than everyday thought— but how much Is it,
really?

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 7-9 (“Instead...them”’)

B) Lines 13-14 (“It’s likely... published”)
C) Lines 29-30 (“We...idea”)

D) Lines 36-37 (‘Science...thought’”)

This question is phrased in a somewhat roundabout manner, so the first thing to do is
simplify it. Basically, it’s asking what type of situation Nosek would think was bad.

The easiest way to proceed after this is to use the main point, which appears in the second
and third paragraphs: Cognitive biases — bad research. Or, more thoroughly, scientists may
unconsciously project their assumptions onto their research and, consequently, interpret
results in such a way that confirms their existing beliefs.

If you approach the question with that idea in mind, you've already established the criteria
for the answer to Question #1, The only option consistent with the idea of a researcher
obtaining results that clearly supported a pre-existing belief is D) - all the others are off-
topic. (Incidentally, that answer is based on an actual case in which a Cornell psychology
professor published a study in a major journal claiming that he had found proof of ESP.)

190

--- PAGE 190 ---
ALENT OOK RRQUACMMOST NC ty Meme Ren a aN

hte ibaitwieatpegioutet en?

Fy
&
2
ia
g
i

NRA a gE

Sit

DSI BLN Ate te BOF ETN

criidepuanieneinas MRivRMNES,

ONE eV RE OL NN PRL E EE LIED ERAS Ne

eC ORE RMI NI Pat ONS RIS AN EERE RATE ESLER

For Question #2, you simply need to find the lines consistent with the point. We could just
plug in each of the line references in order, but in this case there’s a trick: if you look at the
passage, you'll notice that Nosek’s name does not actually appear until the last paragraph.
As a result, you can assume thai the correct set of lines must begin after line 27, eliminating
A) and B). C) is consistent with the point - scientists interpret data to fit their existing biases
- and is therefore correct. It is unnecessary to even check D).

Analogy questions also involve situations and individuals completely unconnected to the
passage itself. You are responsible for drawing the connection between the specific wording
in the passage and the more general situation it describes, and for recognizing which of the
answers describes the same essential scenario. Analogy questions do not typically have
shortcuts but instead require multiple steps of logic. If you follow the steps below, however,
they can become fairly straightforward.

1) Go back to the passage and read the exact lines provided in the question.

Analogy questions are not context-based questions. Provided you understand the general
section of the passage well enough for those lines to make sense, you should be able to
answer the question based only on the lines given. Reading more than a few words
before/after for necessary context will most likely confuse you.

2) Quickly rephrase the scenario presented.

Take a moment and reiterate for yourself exactly what’s going on in those lines. Who are the
people in question, what are they doing, and what is the outcome?

3) Sum up the scenario in general terms. Write it down.

This is the crucial step. You have to understand what's going on in more abstract terms in
order to draw the analogy. What you write can be very short and simple, but if you don’t
have something to look at to keep you focused, you'll usually find it more difficult to
identify the correct answer.

4) Check the answers one at a time, in order.

As you read each answer, think about whether it matches the general “template” for the
scenario you've established in Step 3. If it clearly doesn’t match, cross it out; if there’s any
chance it could work, leave it. If you're left with more than one answer, determine which one
matches the template more closely - that will be the correct answer.

To reiterate: going through these steps need not be time-consuming. In fact, it is possible to
complete them very, very quickly. But you should do your best to avoid skipping steps. If
you don’t define the relationships precisely upfront, it’s very easy to get confused and lose
track of just what you’ re looking for.

191

--- PAGE 191 ---
10

Let's look at an example:

For science fiction aficionados, Isaac Asimov
anticipated the idea of using massive data sets to predict
human behavior, coining it “psychohistory” in his 1951
Foundation trilogy. The bigger the data set, Asimov said
then, the more predictable the future. With big-data
analytics, one can finally see the forest, instead of just
the capillaries in the tree leaves. Or to put it in more
accurate terms, one can see beyond the apparently
random motion of a few thousand molecules of air inside
a balloon; one can see the balloon itself, and beyond that,
that it is inflating, that it is yellow, and that it is part of a
bunch of balloons en route to a birthday party, The
data/software world has, until now, been largely about
looking at the molecules inside one balloon.

Which of the following is most analogous to the
situation described in lines 5-10 (“With... balloon’)?

A) Ascientist makes a groundbreaking discovery
and receives an award.

B) Acclassical musician successfully releases
an album of contemporary songs.

C) A tourist is able to observe an entire city and
the surrounding region from a skyscraper.

D) A private company partners with a local
government to build a new shopping district.

We're going to apply the process described on the previous page to determine the answer:

1) Reread only the lines in question.

Lines 5-10 state:

With big-data analytics, one cant finally see the forest, instead of just the capillaries in the tree leaves.

Or to put it in more accurate ternis, one can see beyond the apparently random motion of a few
thousand molecules of air inside a balloon; one can see the balloon itself, and beyond that, that it is
inflating, that it is yellow, and that it is part of a bunch of balloons en route te a birthday party. The
data/software world has, until now, been largely about looking at the molecules inside one balloon.

2) Reiterate lines in your own words.

Before big data, could only see details; now see everything

You can scribble something down if you find it helpful, but if you think writing will take too
much time or doesn’t seem necessary, you can skip this step.

3) Rephrase #2 in a more general way and write it down.

Small pic. — big pic.

Notice the shorthand here. This is similar to a “main point’ exercise - the goal is to capture
the general idea as simply and quickly as possible, and to have something to look at when
you check the answers so that you don’t get distracted.

4) Find the answer that matches the summary in #3

One-by-one, we're going to check the answers in order.

192

--- PAGE 192 ---
5
;
}
’
i
A

ANTM ETH AEALMY SEE A Yams een HEE ARATE LATE IRGC

NSO LEA NRL ICES

Pare Mere ets

TPR AOR ING DME

&
:
¥
%
E

EN Ran eet nas OME a ou MeN Fs RES NE Dine

AME8 LA CONN AEN SBN EASA ERLANG Ep Ot OE

A) Asceientist makes a groundbreaking discovery and receives an award.

No. This has nothing to do with seeing the big picture. Careful not to get caught up in
associative thinking here. The fact that the passage has scientific topic does not mean that the
situation in the passage is the same as the one in the answer choice.

B) A classical musician successfully releases an album of contemporary songs.

Successfully switching from one genre of music to another is not at all the same thing as
moving from the small picture to the big one. So B) is out.

€) A tourist is able to observe an entire city and the surrounding region from a skyscraper.

Maybe. It doesn’t explicitly discuss moving from the small picture to the big picture, but it
does capture the idea of being able to see beyond one’s immediate surroundings from a
high-up vantage point. That is similar to seefing] beyond the apparently random motion of a few
thousand molecules of air inside a balloon; one can see the balloon itself, and beyond that, that it is

inflating.
So we keep C).

D) A private company partners with a local government to build a new shopping district.

No, the collaboration between public and private has nothing to do with moving from the
small picture to the big picture. This answer is completely off-topic.

So the answer is C). It might not match exactly, but out of all the choices, it comes closest.

193

--- PAGE 193 ---
10

15

20

25

30

You could also be asked to identify an analogy within the passage itself. For example:

Every time a car drives through a major intersection,
it becomes a data point. Magnetic coils of wire lie just
beneath the pavement, registering each passing car. This
starts a cascade of information: Computers tally the
number and speed of cars, shoot the data through
underground cables to a command center and finally
translate it into the colors red, yellow and green. On the
seventh floor of Boston City Hall, the three colors
splash like paint across a wall-sized map.

To drivers, the color red means stop, but on the map
it tells traffic engineers to leap into action. Traffic control
centers like this one—a room cluttered with computer
terminals and live video feeds of urban intersections —
represent the brain of a traffic system. The city’s network
of sensors, cables and signals are the nerves connected to
the rest of the body. “Most people don't think there are
eyes and ears keeping track of all this stuff,” says John
DeBenedictis, the center's engineering director, But in
reality, engineers literally watch our every move,
making subtle changes that relieve and redirect traffic.

The tactics and aims of traffic management are modest
but powerful. Most intersections rely on a combination of
pre-set timing and computer adaptation. For example,
where a busy main road intersects with a quiet residential
street, the traffic signal might give 70 percent of “green
time” to the main road, and 30 percent to the residential
road. (Green lights last between a few seconds and a
couple minutes, and tend to shorten at rush hour to help
the traffic move continuously.) But when traffic
overwhelms the pre-set timing, engineers override the
system and make changes.

Which of the following is most like the “sensors,
cables, and signals?”

A)
B)
C)
D)

“Magnetic coils of wire” (line 2)
“the colors red, yellow, and green” (line 7)
“the brain of a traffic system” (line 14)

“a combination of pre-set timing and
computer adaptation” (lines 22-23)

Sensors, cables, and signals refer to the specific instruments that traffic engineers use to
channel information from the streets into traffic control centers, so we're essentially looking
for an example of one of those things. There’s no shortcut; we need to check each answer.

That said, we'll find the answer pretty quickly. For A), the passage tells us that the magnetic
coils of wire register the number/speed of cars and transmit that information through
underground cables to traffic control centers, so this is exactly what we’re looking for.

Otherwise, B) is wrong because the colors listed are a result of the information transmitted,
not the tools for transmitting the information. C) is wrong because the brain of a traffic system
is the actual traffic control center, and we're looking for the tools the control center uses.
And D) is wrong because a combination of pre-set timing and computer adaptation is mentioned
as an example of the tactics/aims of traffic management. It’s a way of managing traffic at
intersections, not a tool for relaying information back to traffic engineers.

194

--- PAGE 194 ---
&
4

zg
4
Ba
;
i
Z

NAM SERED NN icp SEE

Meee AeteatinXs

ASABE AE ey ee yp ra TORE OEE EN GS pp PA HO

ng gune MaMa

Een aps MEET MANOA TORI NEED PAB Siled NEO a

Extended Reasoning and Analogy Exercises

1. Around the middle of the 20th century, science

dispensed with the fantasy that we could easily colonize

the other planets in our solar system. Science fiction
writers absorbed the new reality: soon, moon and
5 asteroid settings replaced Mars and Venus.

2. Why is the connection between smells and
memories so strong? The reason for these associations
is that the brain’s olfactory bulb is connected to both
the amygdala (an emotion center) and to the

5 hippocampus, which is involved in memory. And,
because smells serve a survival function (odors can
keep us from eating spoiled or poisonous foods), some
of these associations are made very quickly, and may
even involve a one-time association.

3. Experimental scientists occupy themselves with
observing and measuring the cosmos, finding out
what stuff exists, no matter how strange that stuff may
be. Theoretical physicists, on the other hand, are not

5 satisfied with observing the universe. They want to
know why. They want to explain all the properties of
the universe in terms of a few fundamental principles
and parameters. These fundamental principles, in turn,
lead to the “laws of nature,” which govern the

10 behavior of al] matter and energy.

i
1
t
1
i
i
t
i
i
1
i
i
i
i
i
i
i

195

Which of the following is most analogous to the
situation described in the passage?

A) A writer realizes that he is unlikely to become
a successful novelist and accepts a job at a
magazine instead.

B) A musician continues to perform despite
receiving unfavorable reviews from critics.

C) A pilot is forced to make an emergency
landing after encountering bad weather during
a flight.

D) A politician retires from office after becoming
involved in a scandal.

As described in the passage, the connection between
smells and memories is most like which of
the following?

A) adriver has an accident at an intersection and
refuses to drive past it again.

B) achild insists on wearing clothes of a
particular color every day,

C) ayoung woman inexplicably develops an
allergy to a common household item.

D) a food manufacturer develops a technology to
prevent its products from spoiling.

Theoretical physicists’ goal, as indicated in the
passage, is most similar to which of the following?

A) A biologist observing changes in a specimen
over an extended period of time.

B) Members of a community rebuilding a house
destroyed in a storm.

C) An astronaut undergoes years of training to
prepare for a journey into space,

D) A linguist seeking to discover the underlying
features common to distantly related
languages.

--- PAGE 195 ---
4,

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

The sharing economy is a little like online
shopping, which started in America IS years ago. At
first, people were worried about security. But having
made a successful purchase from, say, Amazon, they
felt safe buying elsewhere. Similarly, using Airbnb or
a car-hire service for the first time encourages people to
try other offerings. Next, consider eBay. Having started
out as a peer-to-peer marketplace, it is now dominated
by professional “power sellers” (many of whom started
out as ordinary eBay users). The same may happen with
the sharing economy, which also provides new
opportunities for enterprise. Some people have bought
cars solely to rent them out, for example. Incumbents
are getting involved too. Avis, a car-hire firm, has a share

in a sharing rival. So do GM and Daimler, two carmakers.

In the future, companies may develop hybrid models,
listing excess capacity (whether vehicles, equipment or
office space) on peer-to-peer rental sites. In the past,
new ways of doing things online have not dispiaced the
old ways entirely. But they have often changed them.
Just as internet shopping forced Walmart and Tesco to
adapt, so online sharing will shake up transport, tourism,
equipment-hire and more.

The main worry is regulatory uncertainty. Will
room-4-renters be subject to hotel taxes, for example?
In Amsterdam officials are using Airbnb listings to track
down unlicensed hotels. In some American cities,
peer-to-peer taxi services have been banned after
lobbying by traditional taxi firms. The danger is that
although some rules need to be updated to protect
consumers from harm, incumbents will try to destroy
competition. People who rent out rooms should pay tax,
of course, but they should not be regulated like a Ritz-
Carlton hotel. The lighter rules that typically govern
bed-and-breakfasts are more than adequate. The sharing
economy Is the latest example of the internet’s value to
consumers. This emerging model is now big and
disruptive enough for regulators and companies to have
woken up to it. That is a sign of its immense potential. It
is time to start caring about sharing.

196

Which action would best address a concern about
the sharing economy discussed in the passage?

A) Prohibiting established businesses from
competing with casual sellers.

B) Imposing stricter regulations on individual
room rentals.

C) Establishing clear tax guidelines for services
in the sharing economy.

D) Informing buyers more thoroughly about their
consumer rights.

--- PAGE 196 ---
§
{
i
1
k

TRON RE Manica NOELLE LT Re ay 2 0K

DaptE lOO ng: PUY ORME AY AIRE

wn

10

45

20

25

30

Every day you wake up with a slightly less connected
brain than the night before. New research in mice
reveals that during sleep the connections between brain
cells, which hold information learned throughout the
day, undergo massive shrinkage. The process makes
room for learning new memories while shedding weak
ones. As author Marie Kondo would put it, this is the
brain’s very own “life-changing magic of tidying up.”

“When we are awake, learning and adapting to the
environment, synapses — or the connections between
neurons— get strengthened and grow,” says
neuroscientist Chiara Cirelli of the University of
Wisconsin—Madison, “But you can’t keep growing the
synapses. At some point, you will saturate them.”

After more than a decade of study, Cirelli and her
colleagues have finally found direct evidence that
synapses reset at night. They reported their findings in
Science. Using electron microscopy to look at thousands
of ultrathin brain slices taken from awake and sleeping
mice, they found that after sleep, the size of most
synapses — specifically, the surface area where two
neurons touch each other—shrank by about 18 percent.

Although the findings were in mice, Cirelli suspects
this synaptic resetting also occurs in people. Indirect
evidence, for example, from electrophysiological
recordings of the human brain before and after sleep, is
consistent with this idea, she says.

This shrinkage appears to spare important memories.
About 20 percent of synapses, which were the largest
and may hold well-established memories, did not shrink.
Less important memories may not get entirely axed but
merely pared down—although each synapse shrinks, the
overall pattern of connections that constitute a memory
remains,

197

Which of the following hypothetical findings
would support the hypothesis that synaptic resettling
occurs in humans?

A) An increase in the space where neurons meet
in the evening.

B) A reduction in the space where neurons meet
in the evening.

C) An increase in the space where neurons meet
early in the morning.

D) A reduction in the space where neurons meet
early in the morning.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 9-11 (“When we...grow”)

B) Lines 20-22 (“they found... percent’)
C) Lines 29-30 (“About...shrink’”)

D) Lines 32-34 (“although...remains”)

--- PAGE 197 ---
6. The public has been worried about the safety of
genetically modified (GM) foods since scientists at the
University of Washington developed the first
genetically modified tobacco plants in the 1970s. In the

5 mid-1990s, when the first GM crops reached the
market, Greenpeace, the Sierra Club, Ralph Nader,
Prince Charles and a number of celebrity chefs took
highly visible stands against them. Consumers in
Europe became particularly alarmed: a survey

40 conducted tn 1997, for example, found that 69 percent
of the Austrian public saw serious risks in GM foods,
compared with only 14 percent of Americans.

But as medical researchers know, nothing can really
be “proved safe.” One can only fail to turn up

15 significant risk after trying hard to find it—as is the
case with GM crops.

Although it might seem creepy to add virus DNA to
a plant, doing so is, in fact, no big deal, proponents say.
Viruses have been inserting their DNA into the

20 genomes of crops, as well as humans and all other
organisms, for millions of years. They often deliver the
genes of other species while they are at it, which is why
our own genome is loaded with genetic sequences that
originated in viruses and nonhuman species.

25 Could eating plants with altered genes allow new
DNA to work its way into our own? It is theoretically
possible but hugely improbable. Scientists have never
found genetic material that could survive a trip through
the human gut and make it into ceils. Besides, we are

30 routinely exposed to—we even consume—the viruses
and bacteria whose genes end up in GM foods. The
bacterium B. thuringiensis, for example, which
produces proteins fatal to insects, is sometimes enlisted
as a natural pesticide in organic farming.

35 In any case, people have consumed as many as
trillions of meals containing genetically modified
ingredients over the past few decades. Not a single
verified case of illness has ever been attributed to the
genetic alterations.

40 Critics often disparage U.S. research on the safety
of genetically modified foods, which is often funded
or even conducted by GM companies, such as Monsanto.
But much research on the subject comes from the
European Commission, the administrative body of the

45 E.U., which cannot be so easily dismissed as an industry
tool. The European Commission has funded 130 research
projects, carried out by more than 500 independent teams,
on the safety of GM crops. None of those studies found
any special risks from GM crops.

Based on the passage, a study of GM food safety
conducted by which of the following would be most
likely to reassure critics?

A) A group of researchers who are not affiliated
with the agricultural industry.

B) A private institute whose clients also include
producers of GM foods.

C) A food corporation that wants to expand its
distribution of GM foods.

D) A pharmaceutical company that produces
medications derived from GM plants.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 9-11 (“a survey...foods”)

B) Lines 19-21 (“Viruses.., years”)

C) Lines 35-39 (“In any...alterations”)
D) Lines 46-48 (“The European...crops”)

198

--- PAGE 198 ---
sat ditadied sal

eel Deana Teo, ted he Sila tt at

A — ee

PEP wee EN BN AGO he ENP GLNE BREED YARRA OG LONI LT NY ONG SY ese ene SILT!

Se

10

45

20

25

30

35

. This passage is adapted from Sharon Tregaskis, “What

Bees Tell Us About Global Climate Change,” © 2010
by Johns Hopkins Magazine.

Standing in the apiary on the grounds of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture’s Bee Research Laboratory
in Beltsville, Maryland, Wayne Esaias digs through the
canvas shoulder bag leaning against his leg in search of
the cable he uses to download data. It’s dusk as he runs
the cord from his laptop— precariously perched on the
beam of a cast-iron platform scale—to a small, battery-
operated data logger attached to the spring inside the
scale’s steel column. In the 1800s, a scale like this
would have weighed sacks of grain or crates of apples,
peaches, and melons. Since arriving at the USDA’s bee
lab in January 2007, this scale has been loaded with a
single item: a colony of Apis mellifera, the fuzzy,
black-and-yellow honey bee. An attached, !2-bit
recorder captures the hive’s weight to within a 10th of
a pound, along with a daily register of relative ambient
humidity and temperature.

On this late January afternoon, during a
comparatively balmy respite between the blizzards that
dumped several feet of snow on the Middle Atlantic
states, the bees, their honey, and the wooden boxes in
which they live weigh 94.5 pounds. In mid-July, as last
year’s unusually long nectar flow finally ebbed, the
whole contraption topped out at 275 pounds, including
nearly 150 pounds of honey. “Right now, the colony is
in a cluster about the size of a soccer ball,” says Esaias,
who’s kept bees for nearly two decades and knows
without lifting the lid what’s going on inside this hive.
“The center of the cluster is where the queen is, and
they’re keeping her at 93 degrees —the rest are just
hanging there, tensing their flight muscles to generate
heat.” Provided that they have enough calories to fuel
their winter workout, a healthy colony can survive as
far north as Anchorage, Alaska. “They slowly eat their
way up through the winter,” he says. “It’s a race: Will
they eat all their honey before the nectar flows, or not?”
To make sure their charges win that race, apiarists have
long relied on scale hives for vital management clues.
By tracking daily weight variations, a beekeeper can

40 discern when the colony needs a nutritional boost to

carry it through lean times, whether to add extra combs
for honey storage and even detect incursions by
marauding robber bees —all without disturbing the
colony. A graph of the hive’s weight— which can

i
t
H
i
j
i
H
i
H
i
i
i
H
i
H
i
i
i
1
i
i
}
?
i
i
:
i
|
i
i

199

45 increase by as much as 35 pounds a day in some
parts of the United States during peak nectar flow —
reveals the date on which the bees’ foraging was
was most productive and provides a direct record of
successful pollination. “Around here, the bees make

50 their living in the month of May,” says Esaias, noting
that his bees often achieve daily spikes of 25 pounds,
the maximum in Maryland. “There’s almost no nectar
coming in for the rest of the year.” A scientist by
training and career oceanographer at NASA, Esaias

55 established the Mink Hollow Apiary in his Highland,
Maryland, backyard in {992 with a trio of hand-me-
down hives and an antique platform scale much like
the one at the Beltsville bee lab. Ever since, he’s
maintained a meticulous record of the bees’ daily

60 weight, as well as weather patterns and such details
as his efforts to keep them healthy. In late 2006,
honey bees nationwide began disappearing in an
ongoing syndrome dubbed colony collapse disorder
(CCD). Entire hives went empty as bees inexplicably

65 abandoned their young and their honey. Commercial
beekeepers reported losses up to 90 percent, and the
large-scale farmers who rely on honey bees to ensure
rich harvests of almonds, apples, and sunflowers
became very, very nervous. Looking for clues, Esaias

70 turned to his own records. While the resulting graphs
threw no light on the cause of CCD, a staggering
trend emerged: In the span of just 15 seasons, the date
on which his Mink Hollow bees brought home the
most nectar had shifted by two weeks—from late May

75 to the middle of the month. “I was shocked when I
plotted this up,” he says. “It was right under my nose,
going on the whole time.” The epiphany would lead
Esaias to launch a series of research collaborations,
featuring honey bees and other pollinators, to

80 investigate the relationships among plants, pollinators,
and weather patterns. Already, the work has begun
to reveal insights into the often unintended
consequences of human interventions in natural and
agricultural ecosystems, and exposed significant

85 gaps in how we understand the effect climate change
will have on everything from food production to
terrestrial ecology.

--- PAGE 199 ---
A) The cultivation of hybrid fruits and vegetables.

Based on the passage, to which of the following
hypothetical outcomes would research into the
bees’ disappearance most likely lead?

B) Larger-scale production of the most profitable
crops.

C) More sophisticated tools for studying insect
behavior.

D) A heightened awareness of how shifts in the
climate impact crop growth.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 58-61 (“Ever...healthy”)

B) Lines 65-69 (“Commercial...nervous”)

C) Lines 72-74 (“In...weeks”)
D) Lines 81-87 (“Already...ecology”)

200

--- PAGE 200 ---
LEMANS Atay

NARS NERO NAAR ge SII HRA NAME

Neco oORS ita acns i PSS

abi tSespensti sn

Oat AN RORY fa kD

;
i
§
}
4
3
§
|
\
Fi
i
i

eg tty tanec BEN aA

Explanations: Extended Reasoning and Analogy Exercises

1.1A

What is the scenario described in the passage? Science fiction writers realized that it was not
realistic for humans to easily colonize other planets, so they changed their works to incorporate
that new reality by focusing on asteroids and the moon.

General scenario: realize x is unrealistic, adjust expectations to do y.

The key word in (A) is instead. The answer describes a person who realizes that a goal is
unrealistic and changes plans accordingly (takes a job at a magazine).

B) describes the opposite of the required scenario because the musician continues to perform
when faced with discouragement. In C), the pilot is forced to land, whereas the science fiction
writers make a choice to focus on something new. And in D), the politician does not leave his or
her career because it is unrealistic but rather because he or she is involved in some type of
wrongdoing.

2.1A

What characterizes the relationship between smells and memories? It’s very strong because it
serves a survival function: things that smell bad are more likely to be harmful, and thus people
learn to avoid things associated with those types of things.

General scenario: learn that x is potentially harmful after a brief exposure, so avoid x.

A) is correct because it describes a situation in which a person was exposed to a negative
situation once and, as a result, goes out of the way not to experience that situation again. B) is
incorrect because the child’s preference is clearly positive. Although the scenario in C) is
negative, it does not describe someone who went out of his or her way to avoid a negative
situation after a previous exposure. D) plays on associative interference by using the word food,
which appears in the passage; however, keeping food from spoiling is a positive thing, so this
answer cannot be correct.

3.1D

What is theoretical physicists’ goal? They want to know why. They want to explain all the properties of
the universe in terms of a few fundamental principles and paraimeters. (lines 6-8)

General scenario: want to know the general rules governing a particular phenomenon.

D) is correct because the linguist wants to “discover the underlying features” that distantly
related languages have in common. The underlying assumption is that all languages must have
similarities, or that there is a set of rules governing how language works. A) describes what a
biologist (an experimental scientist) does, not a theoretical physicist. B) and C) are entirely
unrelated to the passage. The scenario in B) involves people collaborating to achieve a goal, and
the one in C) involves a person who spends a lot of time preparing for a difficult undertaking.

201

--- PAGE 201 ---
4.1C

The key word in the question is concern, so start by scanning the passage for that idea. You'll find
a synonym for it in the topic sentence of the second paragraph (line 24): The main worry is
regulatory uncertainty. The question in the following sentence - Will room-4-renters be subject to
hotel taxes - and the reference to taxes again at the end of line 32 indicate that the lack of clarity
regarding taxation is a problem the sharing economy needs to tackle. That makes the answer C).
Be careful with A and B), though. For A), the passage only mentions that the peer-to-peer
marketplace gradually came to be dominated by professional sellers. It does not, however,
indicate that this shift was a bad thing. If anything, the phrase new opportunities for enterprise
implies just the opposite. If you focus initially on the word regilatory, you might jump to connect
it to “regulations” in B). But in fact, the passage is saying the opposite of what B) says, namely
that individuals who rent out rooms on a casual basis should be subject only to loose regulations
(The lighter rules that typically govern bed-and-breakfasts are more than adequate). D) can be eliminated
because it is entirely unsupported by the passage.

§.1-2 D, B

Although 5.1 may seem to depend ona very small detail, you can answer it most easily by using
the big picture. The discussion in the second half of the passage (line 15 to the end) revolves
around the fact that scientist believe synapses - the space where neurons come into contact with
one another - shrink during sleep. Logically, then, an early-morning reduction in people's
synapse size would be consistent with that fact. That makes D) the answer to 5.1. That answer is
directly supported by lines 20-22, which indicate that mouse synapses shrank during sleep. B) is
thus the answer to 5.2.

6.1-2A,D

The answer to this question is located in the last paragraph, so if you read the entire passage and.
look at the question right afterward, you might be able to respond based on memory. Otherwise,
you can scan for the key word critics, which appears in the topic sentence of the last paragraph
(lines 40-42). The key statement here is that research on GM foods sponsored by the European
Comunission cannot be dismissed as an industry tool ~ that is, it is not under pressure to report
findings that would present GM crops in a positive light - because it is carried out by independent
teams. The key phrase not affiliated with the agricultural industry indicates that the researchers in A)
are independent, All of the other answers describe researchers who could be biased toward GM
foods in some way. Because this topic is discussed in the last paragraph, the correct answer to 6.2
must appear there as well. That makes D), whose lines include a reference to independent teams,
the only option.

7.1-2D,D

The question is asking about a possible result of research into the bees’ disappearance.
Discussions of what research could lead to in the future tend to come after discussions of the
research itself, so it’s reasonable to assume that the correct lines must appear at the end. As a
result, it makes the most sense to start by plugging in D) of Question #2. What do we learn in in
lines 81-87? That the research on bees has exposed significant gaps in how we understand the effect
climate change will have on everything from food production to terrestrial ecology. Climate change =
shifts in the climate. We can reasonably infer that this research may eventually close some of
those gaps, ie., lead to a “heightened awareness” of the effects of climate change on crops. D) is
thus the correct answer to both questions.

202

--- PAGE 202 ---
'
\
,
i
q
j
i
a
§

bade graeme cnncem nr RS RGR RIANIB ERE Sp ands SEARO

Aa RAMA ARIS

Stinger

&
iy
§
2
g
£
&
é
5
:

ILL T ie OANA BOSAL IS

= thee aN NNR j OR CONE Nae SN MOE ie queer Matec Sratta

If you’ve already spent some time studying for the SAT, you’ve most likely had the
following experience: you see a question that asks you the primary purpose of a few lines or
a paragraph. You go back, read the lines, and feel pretty confident that you understand what
they’re saying. When you look at the answers, however, they don’t seem to have anything to
do with what you've just read.

You go back to the passage, frantically rereading, trying to figure out what you've missed,
then look back at the answers. Clear as mud. You get rid of a couple that are obviously
wrong but find yourself stuck between B) and C), which both seem equally plausible. You
remember hearing that C) is the most common answer, so you decide to just pick it and hope
for the best.

This scenario typically stems from the fact that most people don’t truly understand that
function questions are not asking what the lines say but rather why they say it. In short, you
cannot understand function without understanding content, but understanding content
alone is not enough to understand function.

One of the things that people often find very foreign is the fact that the SAT not only tests
the ability to comprehend what is written in a passage but also how it’s written. Unlike literal
comprehension questions, which require you to identify a paraphrased version of an idea
contained in the passage, function questions ask you to move beyond understanding the
literal meaning of specific content in the passage to understanding the more abstract role
of that content within the larger context of the passage or paragraph.

In other words, these questions ask you to identify the point that the information in
question supports. In this sense, function questions are very similar to “example” questions:
both ask you to work backwards from the supporting evidence to the larger idea.

While answers to function questions are based on the specific wording in the passage, you
should keep in mind that the answers themselves are not stated word-for-word in the
passage. In fact, the answer choices will sometimes be phrased in much more general or
abstract language than what appears in the passage; you are responsible for drawing the
connection between the two.

That said, you should always keep in mind the topic of the passage because the correct
answer may refer to it, either directly or in rephrased form.

203

--- PAGE 203 ---
Types of Function Questions

Function questions can ask about either a small section of a passage ~ punctuation, words,
phrases or sentences, paragraphs - or the passage as a whole. (Note: questions that ask about
the purpose of a passage are discussed with other big-picture questions in Chapter 3.)

They are typically phrased in the following ways:

¢ The primary purpose of the passage is to...

* The main purpose of the second paragraph (lines x-y) is to...

* The quotation/ phrase, etc. in lines x-y primarily serves to...
And their answers fall into two categories:

1) Those that can only be answered by looking at the specific wording in the lines
provided in the question. In such cases, the lines will typically contain phrasing,
punctuation, or a key transition that points to a particular answer.

2) Those that cannot be obtained by looking at the lines provided in the question
but that instead depend on contextual information.

For the second type of question especially, line references simply tell you where the
information in question is located - they do not teil you its relationship to anything else in
the passage. The information necessary to obtain the answer will often be located either
before the line(s) referenced in the question or, less frequently, after.

Unfortunately, there is no way to tell upfront which category a particular question will fall
into. As a result, you should generally be prepared to read a sentence or two before and
after the lines provided, then focus on the appropriate section as necessary.

Important: If the lines given in the question are relatively close to the beginning of a
paragraph, you should back up and begin reading from there. Topic sentences will nearly
always give you the point of a paragraph, making it much easier for you to understand the
role of a particular word or sentence within it. If the lines are in the middle of a paragraph,
especially a long paragraph, you probably do not need to go all the way back to the
beginning but can instead back up a sentence or two as necessary.

Because SAT Reading focuses heavily on relationships between ideas, it follows that
questions are frequently based on the places in a passage where ideas come into contact with
one another - that is, where new information is introduced, or where there is a change in
focus, point of view, or tone.

The relationships between these ideas are sometimes indicated through the use of specific
words, phrases, and types of punctuation, which correlate with particular function words.
The chart on the next page lists some of the most common examples, along with their
functions.

204

--- PAGE 204 ---
sah EAN EE PAM R EO AMSA APE

PN ELAS LI OE MOGI oH OSE

PNP EON RE ENN ERE BORER ECON LER GMS BIER SEEMED

aeons,

ia
$
3
$
4
:
3
%
‘
§
:
2

al RB Rd ini NIN oe age ENE

Functions of Key Words and Punctuation

Continue

Additionally
Also

And

As well as
Finally

First
Furthermore
In addition
Moreover
Next

Then

Illustrate, Support

For example
For instance
One reason/ another reason

Explain
Because
Explanation
That is

The answer is
The reason is

Colon
Dash

Define

That is (to say)
Properly speaking

Colon
Dash
Parentheses

Compare

As

Just as
Like(wise)
Much as
Similarly

Continuers

Speculate

It is possible
May

Maybe
Might
Perhaps

Cail attention to
Underscore, Highlight
Emphasize

Indeed
In fact
Let me be clear

Capital letters
Exclamation point
Italics

Repetition (of a word,
phrase)

Indicate Importance

Central

Crucial

Essential
Fundamental
Important

Key

Significant

The point/ goal is

Draw a conclusion

Asa result
Consequently
Hence

So

Thereby
Therefore
Thus

Qualify

Dashes
Parentheses

205

Contradictors

Contrast

(Although

But

Despite
However

In contrast

In spite of
Instead
Meanwhile
Nevertheless
On the contrary
On the other hand
Otherwise
Rather

Still

Whereas

While

Yet

Question,
Imply skepticism

But is it really true...?

Question mark
Quotation marks

--- PAGE 205 ---
10

15

20

25

30

Let’s look at some examples:

Every time a car drives through a major intersection,
it becomes a data point. Magnetic coils of wire lie just
beneath the pavement, registering each passing car. This
starts a cascade of information: Computers tally the
number and speed of cars, shoot the data through
underground cables to a command center and finally
translate it into the colors red, yellow and green. On the
seventh floor of Boston City Hall, the three colors
splash like paint across a wall-sized map.

To drivers, the color red means stop, but on the map
it tells traffic engineers to leap into action. Traffic contro!
centers like this one—a room cluttered with computer
terminals and live video feeds of urban intersections —
represent the brain of a traffic system. The city’s network
of sensors, cables and signals are the nerves connected to
the rest of the body. “Most people don't think there are
eyes and ears keeping track of all this stuff,” says John
DeBenedictis, the center's engineering director, But in
reality, engineers literally watch our every move,
making subtle changes that relieve and redirect traffic.

The tactics and aims of traffic management are modest
but powerful. Most intersections rely on a combination of
pre-set timing and computer adaptation. For example,
where a busy main road intersects with a quiet residential
street, the traffic signal might give 70 percent of “green
time” to the main road, and 30 percent to the residential
road. (Green lights last between a few seconds and a
couple minutes, and tend to shorten at rush hour to help
the traffic move continuously.) But when traffic
overwhelms the pre-set timing, engineers override the
system and make change.

The reference to “the color red” (line 10) serves
mainly to

A) emphasize the importance of obeying traffic
signals.

B) indicate that drivers and traffic engineers can
react to information in different ways.

C) explain why traffic engineers are more active
than other workers.

D) point out a striking feature of the map in
Boston City Hall.

If we're going to try to answer the question on our own, the first thing we must do is make
sure that we understand what it’s asking. The phrase serves mainly to indicates that it’s a
purpose or function question. We could therefore rephrase the question as, “Why does the
author use the phrase the color red in that spot?” or “What point does the author use the
phrase the color red to support?”

Although you might be rolling your eyes and saying, “Duh, yeah, that’s obviously what it’s
asking,” rephrasing the question is crucial because it forces you to clarify just what sort of
information you’re looking for. If you skipped this step, you might simply start by
summarizing what the lines say - which is not what you're being asked to do,

Because this is a function question, we must establish context. Line 10 is part of the first
sentence of the paragraph, i.e., the topic sentence. That sentence normally serves to introduce
a topic, so we probably don’t need to back up. We do, however, need to read the entire
sentence carefully.

206

--- PAGE 206 ---
seach SEM AEP WRN NY

i
Pi
e
Pa
q

“ase aie APIs, E72 ye rat.

ARB OBER BN GNA G5 aE Si

PRON ONE serve

Let’s examine the full sentence:

To drivers, the color red means stop, but on the map it tells traffic engineers to
leap into action.

Notice that the sentence is divided into two parts separated by a comma, and that the key
phrase appears in the second part. Very often, when students encounter a sentence that
contains multiple parts like this, they read only one part and overlook the information they
need to answer the question.

That is exactly what could happen in this case. The second half of the sentence begins with
the transition but, which signals the introduction of new, contradictory information. When
but (or a synonym such as however or yet) appears, you should always pay close attention to
what follows. If you stop before the transition, you'll miss key information.

Here, the full sentence indicates that red means different things to drivers (stop) vs. traffic
engineers (leap into action). That is what B) says, so it is correct. Same idea, different words,

Alternately, we can play process of elimination:

A) emphasize the importance of obeying traffic signals.

This answer might seem reasonable, especially if you don’t look back at the passage. After
all, everyone knows that red = stop. In context, however, that association is way off-topic.
The rest of the paragraph focuses on the ways in which traffic engineers are able to keep
track of what happens in a city’s streets. Traffic safety never even enters into the discussion.

B) indicate that drivers and traffic engineers can react to information in different ways.

If you take the time to read lines 10-11 carefully, this probably won't be overly difficult to
identify as the right answer. Again, the word but provides a shortcut: by definition, a
sentence with that word in it is discussing two contradictory, i.e., different, ideas.

C) explain why traffic engineers are more active than other workers.

In general, you need to be careful with comparisons because they are often beyond the scope
of a passage. In this case, the comparison is between traffic engineers and drivers; other
workers are not mentioned. Don’t get distracted by the word active. If you don’t read
carefully, you might see the phrase leap up and assume that C) is right because someone who
leaps up is being active.

D) point out a striking feature of the map in Boston City Hall.

Again, this answer seems vaguely plausible. If you read from the previous sentence, you
would see that the map in Boston City Hall is indeed mentioned. Because red is a striking
color, you might also assume that the reference is intended to emphasize that quality. Sure,
there’s nothing in the passage to explicitly support that interpretation, but hey, nothing really
suggests it’s wrong either. The problem is that this reasoning is based on associative
thinking - connecting things that are only loosely related because you personally associate
them - and it almost always spells trouble on the SAT. The fact that two ideas are discussed
close to one another does not necessarily mean that there is a relationship between them.

207

--- PAGE 207 ---
10

45

20

25

30

Let’s look at another question:

Every time a car drives through a major intersection,
it becomes a data point. Magnetic coils of wire lie just
beneath the pavement, registering each passing car. This
starts a cascade of information: Computers tally the
number and speed of cars, shoot the data through
underground cables to a command center and finally
translate it into the colors red, yellow and green, On the
seventh floor of Boston City Hall, the three colors
splash like paint across a wall-sized map.

To drivers, the color red means stop, but on the map
it tells traffic engineers to leap into action. Traffic control
centers like this one—a room cluttered with computer
terminals and live video feeds of urban intersections —
represent the brain of a traffic system. The city’s network
of sensors, cables and signals are the nerves connected to
the rest of the body. “Most people don’t think there are
eyes and ears keeping track of all this stuff,” says John
DeBenedictis, the center's engineering director. But in
reality, engineers literally watch our every move,
making subtle changes that relieve and redirect traffic.

The tactics and aims of traffic management are modest
but powerful. Most intersections rely on a combination of
pre-set timing and computer adaptation. For example,
where a busy main road intersects with a quiet residential
street, the traffic signal might give 70 percent of “green
time” to the main road, and 30 percent to the residential
road. (Green lights last between a few seconds and a
couple minutes, and tend to shorten at rush hour to help
the traffic move continuously.) But when traffic
overwhelms the pre-set timing, engineers override the
system and make change.

The author mentions “sensors, cables, and signals”
(line 15) in order to

A) describe a problem commonly faced by
traffic engineers.

B) point out some important differences between
traffic control centers and the brain.

C) list some items typically found in traffic
control centers,

D) provide examples of ways drivers’ actions
can be monitored remotely.

If we wanted to simplify this question, we could say something like, “Why does the passage
mention sensors, cables, and signals?” Or, “What point is the reference to sensors, cables, and
signals used to support?”

The line reference is smack in the middle of the paragraph, where supporting evidence
usually appears. To figure out what point it supports, we must focus on the beginning and
the end of the paragraph, where main points are typically stated.

The beginning of the paragraph introduces the comparison between a traffic control center
and the brain. Logically, the sentence that includes the key phrase (The city’s network of
sensors, cables and signals...) must serve to further develop that comparison.

The problem here is that no answer is consistent with that idea. As a result, we must read the

rest of the paragraph, paying close attention to the last sentence. The presence of the word
but suggests that it will be very important.

208

--- PAGE 208 ---
RANMA AOS ROA ONES

ing peony

en et

AN ne fat BOREL MI ReMi RANI CMS ty Ne

eee na een nM Ee bias gic HO ROT

What idea is presented in the last sentence? Traffic engineers are able to watch people’s
every move. Why? Because of the sensors, cables, and signals that relay information from the
streets back to them. So the phrase in question is there to explain how traffic engineers can
monitor drivers’ behavior from a distance, ie., remotely, That makes the correct answer D).

Granted, this question isn’t easy; figuring it out without consulting the answers is a
challenge. At the same time, however, you cannot assume that you will automatically
recognize the correct answer when you see it. Sometimes you will have to do a bit more
work upfront than you'd prefer, in order to avoid confusion.

A) describe a problem commonly faced by traffic engineers.

The paragraph doesn’t discuss a problem at all. It’s completely off-topic.

B) point out some important differences between traffic control centers and the brain.

Remember that every word in an answer choice counts - it takes only one wrong word to
make the whole thing incorrect. That’s the case here. The author draws a comparison
between traffic control centers and the brain, but this answer just mentions “differences,”
which aren't discussed at all. This answer describes exactly the opposite of what's going on
in the passage.

C) list some items typically found in traffic control centers.

Be careful here. The passage does mention traffic control centers and sensors, cables, and
signals in very close proximity to one another. The problem is that the passage only states
that computer terminals and live video feeds are items found in traffic control centers (lines
12-13). In the next sentence, the author indicates that sensors, cables, and signals are the
nerves present throughout the city - not in traffic control centers. So C) is out.

D) provide examples of ways drivers’ actions can be monitored remotely.

If you work by process of elimination and conclusively eliminate the other choices for the
reasons discussed above, you can safely choose D). If, however, you simply read the answers
without checking each one, you can easily eliminate this type of answer - either because you
don’t remember the information, or because you don’t think it sounds right.

If you’re stuck between D) and another answer, you can follow the same steps described
earlier and read to the end of the paragraph. When you get to the last sentence, you can see

that the statement engineers literally watch our every move (line 19) directly corresponds to the
idea of monitoring drivers’ actions remotely. Again, that makes D) correct.

On the next page, we’re going to look at a full-length passage.

209

--- PAGE 209 ---
This passage is adapted from Kristin Sainani, “What,
Me Worry?” © 2014, Stanford magazine.

According to a 2013 national survey by the
American Psychological Association, the average
stress level among adults is 5.1 on a scale of 10;
that’s one and a half points above what the
respondents judged to be healthy. Two-thirds of people
say managing stress is important, and nearly that
proportion had attempted to reduce their stress in the
previous five years. Yet only a little over a third say
they succeeded at doing so. More discouraging, teens

10 and young adults are experiencing higher levels of

45

20

25

30

35

40

45

stress, and also are struggling to manage it.

“Stress has a very bad reputation. It’s in pretty bad
shape, PR-wise,” acknowledges Firdaus Dhabhar, an
associate professor of psychiatry and behavioral science
at Stanford. “And justifiably so,” he adds.

Much of what we know about the physical and
mental toll of chronic stress stems from seminal work
by Robert Sapolsky beginning in the late 1970s.
Sapolsky, a neuroendocrinologist, was among the first
to make the connection that the hormones released
during the fight-or-flight response — the ones that
helped our ancestors avoid becoming dinner—have
deleterious effects when the stress is severe and
sustained. Especially insidious, chronic exposure to
one of these hormones, cortisol, causes brain changes
that make it increasingly difficult to shut the stress
response down,

But take heart; Recent research paints a different
portrait of stress, one in which it indeed has a positive
side. “There’s good stress, there’s tolerable stress,
and there’s toxic stress,” says Bruce McEwen of
Rockefeller University, an expert on stress and the
brain who trained both Sapolsky and Dhabhar.

Situations we typically perceive as stressful—a
confrontation with a co-worker, the pressure to
perform, a to-do list that’s too long —are not the toxic
type of stress that's been linked to serious health
issues such as cardiovascular disease, autoimmune
disorders, severe depression and cognitive impairment.
Short bouts of this sort of everyday stress can actually
be a good thing: Just think of the exhilaration of
the deadline met or the presentation crushed, the
triumph of holding it all together. And, perhaps not
surprisingly, it turns out that beating yourself up about
being stressed is counterproductive, as worrying about
the negative consequences can in itself exacerbate any
ill effects.

210

50

55

60

65

70

75

8&0

8&5

90

When Dhabhar was starting his graduate work in
McEwen’s lab in the early 1990s, “the absolutely
overwhelming dogma was that stress suppresses
immunity.” But this didn't make sense to him from an
evolutionary perspective, If a lion is chasing you, he
reasoned, your immune system should be ramping up,
readying itself to heal torn flesh. It occurred to Dhabhar
that the effects of acute stress, which lasts minutes to
hours, might differ from the effects of chronic stress,
which lasts days to years.

Dhabhar likens the body’s immune cells to soldiers.
Because their levels in the blood plummet during acute
stress, “people used to say: ‘See, stress is bad for you;
your immune system's depressed,” he says. “But most
immune battles are not going to be fought in the blood.”
He suspected that the immune cells were instead
traveling to the body’s “battlefields” —sites most likely
to be wounded in an attack, like the skin, gut and lungs.
In studies where rats were briefly confined (a short-term
stressor), he showed that after an initial surge of immune
cells into the bloodstream, they quickly exited the blood
and took up positions precisely where he predicted they
would,

“His work was a pioneering demonstration of how
important the difference is between acute and chronic
stress,” says Sapolsky, a professor of biology,
neurology, and neurological sciences and neurosurgery.
“Overwhelmingly, the bad health effects of stress are
those of chronic stress.”

This strategic deployment of immune cells can speed
wound healing, enhance vaccine effectiveness and
potentially fight cancer. In 2009, Dhabhar’s team
showed that knee surgery patients with robust immune
redistribution following the stress of surgery recovered
significantly faster and had better knee function a year
later than those with a more sluggish mobilization. In
other studies, volunteers who exercised or took a math
test (both acute stressors) immediately prior to being
vaccinated had a heightened antibody response relative
to volunteers who sat quietly. And in 2010, the
researchers curbed the development of skin cancer in
UV-exposed mice by stressing them before their
sunlamp sessions. Dhabhar speculates that giving
cancer patients low-dose injections of stress
hormones might help prime their immune systems to
fight the cancer, “It may not work out, but if it did,
the benefits could be tremendous,” he says.

--- PAGE 210 ---
singe

SORTER OME

RESO NR CER IAEA CASON ERIE PIAA 6

ATA REM REIN OME

REPORTS ELA MINOR SLI EE IE LE DAS ED SLI NE VEL T IN EPRI

Seth etemy vitae,

Bate we pe EE BLOND LD DOT LEGIT 18 BIO! CE oy

What function does the fifth paragraph
(lines 34-47) serve tn the passage as a whole?

The discussion of knee surgery patients in lines
79-83 primarily serves to

It describes the destructive toll of stress on
the human body.

B) It provides examples that undermine
conventional perceptions of stress.

C) It calls attention to the dangers of a range of

A

—

A) emphasize the connection between physical
activity and health.

B) compare the effects of acute and chronic stress
on the healing process.

C) explain how stress can hinder recovery from

illness and injury. maladies.
D) illustrate the body’s ability to repair itself by D) It highlights the prominence of stress in
sending certain cells to injured areas. daily life.

Question #1: This question is nice enough to provide you with a line reference, so start by
reading it: In 2009, Dhabhar’s team showed that knee surgery patients with robust immune
redistribution following the stress of surgery recovered significantly faster and had better knee
function a year later than those with a more sluggish mobilization.

Essentially, these lines tell us that patients with a stronger immune response (immune
redistribution) did better after surgery than patients with weaker immune responses.

Now, take the remaining answers in order. A) doesn’t fit because the focus is on patients’
response at a cellular level. Physical activity is not mentioned. B) might seem tempting;
however, this answer misses the mark in a very important way. The lines in question do
make a comparison, but it’s between patients with strong vs. weak immune responses, not
acute vs. chronic stress. In addition, this section of the passage focuses pretty much
exclusively on acute stress. C) is incorrect because the passage indicates that a strong
immune response, which is prompted by acute stress, helps people heal. Hindering (getting
in the way of) recovery is exactly the opposite.

That leaves D), which you might initially have trouble connecting back to the passage. The
key is to recognize that in the second half of the passage, the author uses different words to
describe the same phenomenon. In the lines referenced, the author refers to robust immune
redistribution. That phrase actually refers back to the phenomenon described in lines 63-65,
namely that acute stress causes immune cells (=certain cells) to migrate to parts of the body
that are under attack. Same idea, different words.

Question #2: “Purpose of a paragraph” questions appear frequently, so you should make
sure that you are comfortable working through them. In most cases, you should start by
focusing on the end of the previous paragraph and the beginning of the paragraph in
question - if not the topic sentence alone, then the first couple of sentences. If you can’t
figure out the answer from those places, then you should check the last sentence. In this case,
though, the first sentence gives you everything you need. Even better, it contains some very
interesting punctuation, namely a set of dashes. What is between those dashes? A list of
examples. Examples of what? Of ways in which stress can be good.

Now, consider that information in context. The beginning of the passage makes it clear that
stress has traditionally been viewed as harmful (=conventional perceptions), Given that, the
discussion of stress as something that helps people thrive and conquer difficult situations
serves to contradict (=undermine) that perception. The answer is therefore B).

211

--- PAGE 211 ---
Ww

On

“Vague” Answers

So far, we've looked at answer choices that spelled things out pretty clearly. Occasionally,
though, you might see a set of answers that is a lot more abstract. For instance:

A) justify an approach.
B) offer an explanation.
C) promote a theory.
D) refute a claim.

When confronted with this kind of phrasing, a lot of people are understandably confused.
The key is to understand that these types of answers move from concrete to abstract in two
different ways: first, through a function word such as explain or refute; and second, by
rephrasing the content of the passage in a more general way.

Although making the connection between the answers and the passage can take some
getting used to, the process for answering these questions is the same: read from a sentence
or two before the line reference to a sentence or two after, paying attention to strong
language and “unusual” punctuation. You should find the information you need.

Note that a long line reference often does not indicate a lot of important information. In
general, the longer the line reference, the smaller the amount of relevant text.

Let’s look at some examples:

Most people have so-called flashbulb memories ete
The function of the last sentence (lines 5-7) is to

of where they were and what they were doing when
something momentous happened. (Unfortunately,
staggeringly terrible news seems to come out of the
blue more often than staggeringly good news.) But as
clear and detailed as these memories feel, psychologists
have discovered they are surprisingly inaccurate.

A) acknowledge a point.

B) highlight a misconception.
C) criticize a tradition.

D) propose an alternative.

What information does the last sentence convey? That flashbulb memories are inaccurate.
Inaccurate = a misconception, That makes the answer B). Easy, right?

The correct answer could also be phrased this way:

The function of the last sentence (lines 5-7) is to

Most people have so-called flashbulb memories
of where they were and what they were doing when
something momentous happened. (Unfortunately,
staggeringly terrible news seems to come out of the
blue more often than staggeringly good news.) But as
clear and detailed as these memories feel, psychologists
have discovered they are surprisingly inaccurate.

A) acknowledge a point.

B) indicate an unexpected discovery.
/ C) criticize a tradition.

D) propose an alternative.

In this case, the key word is surprising. Surprising = unexpected, hence B) again.

212

--- PAGE 212 ---
Ago Saag pR On A NOUN HON

LASS Mpc tae ttt

:
5
i

eS oa

ia ase

0A IR RO RAILS ener

PE Loses EMS AEN NEOPM NTA MORE IGE ANE II Fo CONS PRIM BOT SD I

One more:

Sometime near the end of the Pleistocene, a band a mastodon rib. Since then, the age of the find has been
of people left northeastern Asia, crossed the Bering | debated, but recently anthropologist Michae] Waters
land bridge when the sea level was low, entered ; and his colleagues announced a new radiocarbon date
Alaska and became the first Americans. Since the | 20 for the rib: 13,800 years ago, making it 800 years older

than the oldest Clovis artifact. Other pre-Clovis
evidence comes from a variety of locations across the
New World.

In context of the passage as a whole, the primary
purpose of the second paragraph (lines 14-23) is to

5 1930s, archaeologists have thought these people were
members of the Clovis culture. First discovered in
New Mexico in the 1930s, the Clovis culture is known
for its distinct stone tools, primarily fluted projectile
points. For decades, Clovis artifacts were the oldest

10 known in the New World, dating to 13,000 years ago.
But in recent years, researchers have found more and
more evidence that people were living in North and
South America before the Clovis.

The most recently confirmed evidence comes from

15 Washington. During a dig conducted from 1977 to 1979,
researchers uncovered a bone projectile point stuck in

A) concede a point.

B) support a claim.

C) criticize a tradition.
D) celebrate a discovery.

Before we look at how to answer the question for real, let’s look at a common mistake:
considering the paragraph only from the standpoint of its content.

If you summarized the content of the second paragraph, you might say that it talks about
some very old discoveries that researchers have made in the New World.

When looking at the answer choices, you might seize on the statement ...During a dig
conducted from 1977 to 1979, researchers uncovered a bone projectile point stuck in a mastodon rib
and conclude that since that’s consistent with the idea of “a finding,” then D) would make
sense, You might not be sure about the “celebrate” part, but discoveries are exciting,
particularly ones involving almost 14,000-year-old objects, so obviously that’s something
people would want to celebrate, right? (Wrong.)

As discussed earlier, the problem with this approach is that it relies on a fundamental
misconception of what the question is asking. The question is not asking what the second
paragraph says. Rather, it is asking about the second paragraph’s function within the
passage, and its relationship to the first paragraph.

To figure out the second paragraph’s function, you must back up and figure out its
relationship to the first paragraph. There are only two paragraphs here, so it is unnecessary
to take anything else into consideration.

If you read the last sentence of the first paragraph, you can see that it begins with the very
important contradictor but. The use of this transition signals a shift to the “new idea” - in
this case, the idea that people were living in the Americas before the Clovis.

Now, look at the first sentence of the second paragraph: The most recently confirmed evidence
comes from Washington. This sentence is essentially telling us that paragraph’s function is to
provide evidence for (=support), the idea (=a claim) that the Clovis were not the first people
to inhabit the Americas. The answer is therefore B).

213

--- PAGE 213 ---
10

i5

20

25

30

Playing Positive and Negative with Function Questions

One of the simplest ways to approach function questions and eliminate answer choices
quickly is to play positive/negative. Positive passages or portions of passages typically have
positive answers, while negative passages and portions of passages typically have negative

ones.

Although answer choices often contain function verbs that are more neutral than the
language of the passage itself, the information in the rest of the answer may be distinctly
positive or negative. Even if this strategy alone does not get you all the way to the correct
answer, it can allow you to quickly eliminate one or two choices upfront, giving you more
time to focus on smaller distinctions between the remaining answers.

The chart on p. 216 provides some examples of common positive, negative, and neutral
function words that are likely to appear in answer choices.

Let’s look at an example:

These are stimulating times for anyone interested
in questions of animal consciousness. On what seems
like a monthly basis, scientific teams announce the
results of new experiments, adding to a preponderance
of evidence that we’ve been underestimating animal
minds, even those of us who have rated them fairly
highly, New animal behaviors and capacities are
observed in the wild, often involving tool use—or at
least object manipulation —the very kinds of activity
that led the distinguished zoologist Donald R. Griffin to
found the field of cognitive ethology (animal thinking)
in 1978: octopuses piling stones in front of their
hideyholes, to name one recent example; or dolphins
fitting marine sponges to their beaks in order to dig for
food on the seabed; or wasps using small stones to
smooth the sand around their egg chambers, concealing
them from predators. At the same time neurobiologists
have been finding that the physical structures in our
own brains most commonly held responsible for
consciousness are not as rare in the animal kingdom as
had been assumed. Indeed they are common. All of this
work and discovery appeared to reach a kind of
crescendo last summer, when an international group of
prominent neuroscientists meeting at the University of
Cambridge issued “The Cambridge Declaration on
Consciousness in Non-Human Animals,” a document
stating that “humans are not unique in possessing the
neurological substrates that generate consciousness.”
It goes further to conclude that numerous documented
animal behaviors must be considered “consistent with
experienced feeling states.”

214

The reference to hideyholes, marine sponges, and
small stones in lines 13-[5 serves mainly to

A) describe ways that animals hide themselves
from predators.

B) point out that tools produced by animals are
less complex than human tools.

provide instances of novel animal behavior in
the wild.

indicate the limits of animal consciousness.

C)

D)

--- PAGE 214 ---
SN net Hise

AUR RONEN pA RE REZ

eT AC VIANA HIS ca RARE i pee CORED ME OREN Bah SOHO

This is a science passage, so its tone is relatively neutral. If we look more closely, however,
we can see that the author's attitude is actually pretty positive. Again, this is hardly a
surprise. Authors of science passages almost always regard new discoveries as good things
- that is why they’re writing about them in the first place.

In this case, the first sentence of the passage, These are stimulating times for anyone interested in
questions of animal consciousness, tells us that the author has a positive attitude toward his
subject. Even if you find the phrasing somewhat confusing, the presence of the word
stimulating is a big clue, suggesting that the correct answer will be either positive or neutral,
Any negative option can be eliminated.

When we look at the answer choices, we can notice that B) and D) contain negative phrases
(less complex and limits). Both answers can thus be eliminated immediately.

That leaves us with only two possibilities, but we still have to be careful. Remember that
answers to function questions are often found before the lines referenced, and A) refers to
something that is mentioned after. The answer is constructed that way precisely because so
many students will begin reading at line 13 and not consider any information before it. The
problem is that small stones are discussed only in relation to wasps; they have nothing to do
with the other animals/examples mentioned.

The point is actually found all the way back in lines 7-8: New animal behaviors and capacities
are observed in the wild, often involving tool use. In addition to the word new, the dashes in that
sentence indicate that it is important. C) rephrases that sentence, so it is correct.

Shortcut: C) uses the word novel in its second meaning (“new”). Even in the absence of any
other information, that usage suggests that C) has an above-average chance of being correct.

Very important: as is true for answers to Reading questions in general, function answers
that contain extreme language, either positive or negative (e.g., condenin, attack, prove), are
usually incorrect.

A note about proving and disproving: One common point of confusion concerns the terms
prove and disprove. Many high schoo] students are accustomed to hearing teachers repeatedly
tell them to “prove their thesis,” and so it seems logical that SAT authors would do the same.
This, alas, is one of the major differences between high school and college: while high school
assignments tend to be framed in terms of black-and-white, the reality is that authors who
write for adult readers are far more nuanced - that is, that they discuss theories that can be
supported, illustrated, challenged, etc., but that cannot be definitively proved or disproved.
As a result, answers that contain these words are typically far outside the bounds of what
any author could accomplish in 85 lines or so.

215

--- PAGE 215 ---
Common Function Words and Phrases

Positive

Negative

Neutral

Support

Advance (a claim)
Affirm

Bolster

Claim

Defend

Exemplify
Illustrate

Prove*

Provide (evidence)
Offer (an example)
Substantiate

Praise
Celebrate

Acknowledge

Propose

Imply
Suggest

Emphasize

Call attention to
Focus on
Highlight
Reinforce
Reiterate
Underscore

Explain

Account for
Articulate
Clarify
Define
Explicate
Justify*
Qualify
Specify

Persuade

Advocate
Encourage
Promote

Refute

Attack*
Challenge
Condemn*
Contradict
Criticize
Debate
Decry

Deny
Discredit*
Dismiss
Dispel
Disprove*
Imply skepticism
Question
Undermine*

Warn

Raise concern

Make fun of

Mock*
Satirize
Scoff at*

Concede

Acknowledge
Recognize

Exaggerate
Downplay
Minimize*

Lament*

Bemoan*

Describe

Characterize
Convey
Depict
Discuss
Dramatize
Evoke
Portray
Present
Represent
Show
Trace

Indicate
Identify

Point out
Reveal

Introduce

Shift

Change
Digress*
Restate
Paraphrase
Sunmumarize
Hypothesize
Speculate

Analyze

Consider
Describe
Develop
Explore
Reflect on

Attribute
Cite
Allude to

*Signals an answer that is likely to be incorrect.

For a glossary of selected terms, see p. 230.

216

--- PAGE 216 ---
i

TO ae a

A
q
2
¥
g
i
i
5
e
x
§
:
8
&
Fs
®
:
;
4
£
E
x
z
é
5

é
#1
%
:
i
§
&
=
z
H
5
&
i
é
s
4
F)

EIN SA SOS AEE PRO INS Se PLN NEM A A Pg ON NIRA a aN ING AN

:
i
4
H
i
i
H
§
:
i
H

Reading for Function Exercises

To understand what the new software-—that is,
analytics—can do that’s different from more familiar
software like spreadsheets, word processing, and
graphics, consider the lowly photograph. Here the

§ relevant facts aren’t how many bytes constitute a digital

10

is

20

25

30

35

40

45

photograph, or a billion of them. That’s about as
instructive as counting the silver halide molecules used
to form a single old-fashioned print photo. The important
feature of a digital image’s bytes is that, unlike
crystalline molecules, they are uniquely easy to store,
transport, and manipulate with software. In the first era
of digital images, people were fascinated by the
convenience and malleability (think PhotoShop) of
capturing, storing, and sharing pictures. Now, instead of
using software to manage photos, we can mine features
of the bytes that make up the digital image. Facebook
can, without privacy invasion, track where and when,
for example, vacationing is trending, since digital images
reveal at least that much. But more importantly, those
data can be cross-correlated, even in real time, with
seemingly unrelated data such as local weather, interest
rates, crime figures, and so on. Such correlations
associated with just one photograph aren’t revealing.
But imagine looking at billions of photos over weeks,
months, years, then correlating them with dozens of
directly related data sets (vacation bookings, air traffic),
tangential information (weather, interest rates,
unemployment), or orthogonal information (social or
political trends). With essentially free super-computing,
we can mine and usefully associate massive, formerly
unrelated data sets and unveil all manner of economic,
cultural, and social realities.

For science fiction aficionados, Isaac Asimov
anticipated the idea of using massive data sets to predict
human behavior, coining it “psychohistory” in his 1951
Foundation trilogy. The bigger the data set, Asimov said
then, the more predictable the future. With big-data
analytics, one can finally see the forest, instead of just
the capillaries in the tree leaves. Or to put it in more
accurate terms, one can see beyond the apparently
random motion of a few thousand molecules of air inside
a balloon; one can see the balloon itself, and beyond that,
that it is inflating, that it is yellow, and that it is part of a
bunch of balloons en route to a birthday party. The
data/software world has, until now, been largely about
looking at the molecules inside one balloon.

217

2}

The reference to “capturing, storing, and sharing
pictures” (line 14) primarily serves to

A) underscore a key difference between old and
new technologies.

B) point out technological features that were
once considered novel.

C) describe how digital images are preserved.

D) emphasize the rapid nature of technological
change.

The references to local weather, interest rates, and
crime figures (lines 21-22) primarily serve to

A) provide examples of disparate subjects that
may have hidden connections.

B) emphasize the range of topics covered on
news websites.

C) point out local issues that may be of broader
interest.

D) call attention to the limits of data analysis.

The passage’s discussion of Isaac Asimov
primarily serves to

A) introduce the concept of science fiction.

B) call attention to an individual who foresaw
recent developments.

C) describe the influence of science fiction fans
on technological discoveries.

D) emphasize the differences between science
fiction and science.

--- PAGE 217 ---
10

15

20

25

30

35

40

The following passage is adapted from a novel by Willa
Cather, originally published in 1918, The protagonist has
been sent to live with his grandparents in Nebraska.

All the years that have passed have not dimmed my
memory of that first glorious autumn. The new country
lay open before me: there were no fences in those days,
and I could choose my own way over the grass uplands,
trusting the pony to get me home again. Sometimes 1
followed the sunflower-bordered roads.

1 used to love to drift along the pale-yellow comfields,
looking for the damp spots one sometimes found at their
edges, where the smartweed soon turned a rich copper
color and the narrow brown leaves hung curled like
cocoons about the swollen joints of the stem. Sometimes
I went south to visit our German neighbors and to
admire their catalpa grove, or to see the big elm tree
that grew up out of a deep crack in the earth and had a
hawk’s nest in its branches, Trees were so rare in that
country, and they had to make such a hard fight to grow,
that we used to feel anxious about them, and visit them
as if they were persons. It must haye been the scarcity of
detail in that tawny landscape that made detail so
precious.

Sometimes I rode north to the big prairie-dog town to
watch the brown earth-owls fly home in the late afternoon
and go down to their nests underground with the dogs.
Antonia Shimerda liked to go with me, and we used to
wonder a great deal about these birds of subterranean
habit. We had to be on our guard there, for rattlesnakes
were always lurking about. They came to pick up an easy
living among the dogs and owls, which were quite
defenseless against them; took possession of their
comfortable houses and ate the eggs and puppies. We
felt sorry for the owls. It was always mournful to see
them come flying home at sunset and disappear under
the earth.

But, after all, we felt, winged things who would live
like that must be rather degraded creatures. The dog-town
was a long way from any pond or creek. Otto Fuchs said
he had seen populous dog-towns in the desert where
there was no surface water for fifty miles; he insisted that
some of the holes must go down to water—nearly two
hundred feet, hereabouts. Antonia said she didn't believe
it; that the dogs probably lapped up the dew in the early
morning, like the rabbits.

jriameasttttnttsteterreeon sereemmemnyeestttetrrnnerrrereneemunirerienitelterrenmvrmeeememeneennayrenet tentbn nineteen: namemepantsatttctrhern meenneeanauatetacabrretharnreverirnanmunqauntysetetwrrrtnreteannnapamaatsmstyetirrrrert eter?

218

45

50

55

60

65

70

Antonia had opinions about everything, and she was
soon able to make them known. Almost every day she
came running across the prairie to have her reading
lesson with me. Mrs. Shimerda grumbled, but realized it
was important that one member of the family should
learn English. When the lesson was over, we used to go
up to the watermelon patch behind the garden. I split the
melons with an old corn-knife, and we lifted out the
hearts and ate them with the juice trickling through our
fingers. The white melons we did not touch, but we
watched them with curiosity. They were to be picked
later, when the hard frosts had set in, and put away for
winter use. After weeks on the ocean, the Shimerdas
were famished for fruit. The two girls would wander for
miles along the edge of the cornfields, hunting for
ground-cherries.

Antonia loved to help grandmother in the kitchen
and to learn about cooking and housekeeping. She
would stand beside her, watching her every movement.
We were willing to believe that Mrs. Shimerda was a
good housewife in her own country, but she managed
poorly under new conditions. I remember how horrified
we were at the sour, ashy-grey bread she gave her
family to eat. She mixed her dough, we discovered, in
an old tin peck-measure that had been used about the
barn. When she took the paste out to bake it, she left
smears of dough sticking to the sides of the measure, put
the measure on the shelf behind the stove, and let this
residue ferment. The next time she made bread, she
scraped this sour stuff down into the fresh dough to
ser've as yeast.

The reference to the catalpa grove and the elm tree
(line 13) primarily serves to

illustrate the narrator’s love of nature.

call attention to the diversity of the natural
world,

A)
B)

C)
D)

emphasize the barrenness of the landscape.

explain why the narrator felt anxious about his
new life,

--- PAGE 218 ---
EOI IODC ON PER EI

3
5
§
A
i
EY

SEN A anon CERN phat

tS EELE IPAS RE RA LM MESS TATE

The narrator’s reference to ground-cherries
(line 58) primarily serves to

A) emphasize the wholesome quality of the
Shimerdas’ new life.

B) demonstrate the difficulty of finding food in
the narrator’s new home.

C) describe a food that the narrator was desperate
to eat,

D) suggest the limited range of foods to which
the Shimerdas previously had access.

The narrator’s statement that Mrs. Shimerda “was a
good housewife in her own country” (lines 62-63)
primarily serves to

A) highlight a contrast.
B) criticize an injustice.
C) defend a decision.
D) explain a reaction.

219

--- PAGE 219 ---
3. The following passage is adapted from “Makerspaces,
Hackerspaces, and Community Scale Production in
Detroit and Beyond,” © 2013 by Sean Ansanelli,

During the mid-!980s, spaces began to emerge
across Europe where computer hackers could convene
for mutual support and camaraderie. In the past few
years, the idea of fostering such shared, physical spaces

5 has been rapidly adapted by the diverse and growing
community of “makers,” who seek to apply the idea of
“hacking” to physical objects, processes, or anything
else that can be deciphered and improved upon.

A hackerspace is described by hackerspaces.org as

10 a “community-operated physical space where people
with common interests, often in computers, technology,
science, digital art or electronic art, can meet, socialize,
and/or collaborate.” Such spaces can vary in size,
available technology, and membership structure (some

15 being completely open), but generally share community-
oriented characteristics. Indeed, while the term
“hacker” can sometimes have negative connotations,
modern hackerspaces thrive off of community,
openness, and assimilating diverse viewpoints — these
20 often being the only guiding principles in otherwise
informal organizational structures.

In recent years, the city of Detroit has emerged
as a hotbed for hackerspaces and other DIY
(“Do-It-Yourself”) experiments. Several hackerspaces

25 can already be found throughout the city and several
more are currently in formation. Of course, Detroit’s
attractiveness for such projects can be partially
attributed to cheap real estate, which allows aspiring
hackers to acquire ample space for experimentation.

30 Some observers have also described this kind of making

and tinkering as embedded in the DNA of Detroit’s
residents, who are able to harness substantial
intergenerational knowledge and attract like-minded
individuals.

Hackerspaces (or “makerspaces”) can be found in
more commercial forms, but the vast majority of spaces
are self-organized and not-for-profit. For example, the
OmniCorp hackerspace operates off member fees to
cover rent and new equipment, from laser cutters to
40 welding tools. OmniCorp also hosts an “open hack

night” every Thursday in which the space is open to
the general public. Potential members are required to
attend at least one open hack night prior to a consensus
vote by the existing members for admittance; no

45 prospective members have yet been denied.

A visit to one of OmniCorp’s open hack nights
reveals the vast variety of activity and energy existing

35

220

in the space. In the main common room alone, activities
range from experimenting with sound installations and
50 learning to program Arduino boards to building
speculative “oloid” shapes — all just for the sake of it.
With a general atmosphere of mutual support,
participants in the space are continually encouraged
to help others.

One of the most active community-focused initiatives
in the city is the Mt. Elliot Makerspace. Jeff Sturges,
former MIT Media Lab Fellow and Co-Founder of
OmniCorp, started the Mt, Elliot project with the aim of
replicating MIT’s Fab Lab modei on a smaller, cheaper
scale in Detroit. “Fab Labs” are production facilities that
consist of a small collection of flexible computer-
controlled tools that cover several different scales and
various materials, with the aim to make “almost
anything” (including other machines). The Mt. Elliot

65 Makerspace now offers youth-based skill development
programs in eight areas: Transportation, Electronics,
Digital Tools, Wearables, Design and Fabrication, Food,
Music, and Arts. The range of activities is meant to
provide not only something for everyone, but a well-

70 rounded base knowledge of making to all participants.

While the center receives some foundational support,
the space also derives significant support from the local
community, Makerspaces throughout the city connect
the space’s youth-based programming directly to

75 school curriculums.

The growing interest in and development of
hacker/makerspaces has been explained, in part, as a
result of the growing maker movement. Through the
combination of cultural norms and communication

80 channels from open source production as well as
increasingly available technologies for physical
production, amateur maker communities have developed
in virtual and physical spaces.

Publications such as Wired are noticing the

85 transformative potential of this emerging movement
and have sought to devote significant attention to its
development. Chief editor Chris Anderson recently
published a book entitled Makers, in which he proclaims
that the movement will become the next Industrial

90 Revolution. Anderson argues such developments will
allow for a new wave of business opportunities by
providing mass-customization rather than mass-
production,

The transformative potential of these trends goes

95 beyond new business opportunities or competitive
advantages for economic growth. Rather, these trends
demonstrate the potential to actually transform
economic development models entirely.

55

60

--- PAGE 220 ---
NA ar ot RII EO DIM a IRL MERGE RIS TIONG EA YEE IEE SON TEEE EDO LENE ANNOAI NAR RONESTDD

5
}
i
5
y
F
:
1

The passage’s discussion of Europe in the 1980s
primarily serves to

A)
B)

C)

D)

The author’s statement that “the term ‘hacker’ can

introduce the concept of hackerspaces.

call attention to Detroit’s unique role in the
hackerspace movement.

compare hackerspaces in the United States to
foreign hackerspaces.

provide a description of a place where
hackerspaces have been particularly popular.

sometimes have negative connotations” (lines 16-17)
serves to

A)
B)
C)
D)

criticize a movement.
anticipate a potential criticism.
contrast past and present forms of technology.

emphasize the exclusive nature of an
organization.

The primary function of the third paragraph

(lines 22-34) is to

A)
B)
C)

D)

point out that the decline of certain industries
can have unexpected benefits.

explain why hackerspaces have succeeded in
some cities and failed in others.

indicate some of the reasons that hackerspaces
have flourished in a particular city.
demonstrate the effects of geography on

the economy.

221

The passage’s discussion of OmniCorp (line 38)
primarily serves to

A)
B)
C)

D)

call attention to hackerspaces’ urgent need
for funds.

suggest that money should not play a role in
creative enterprises.

point out that non-profit hackerspaces are
typically more successful than for-profit ones.
emphasize that hackerspaces are open and
flexible organizations.

The references to Wired magazine and Chris
Anderson primarily serve to

A)
B)

C)

D)

describe a key figure in the maker movement.
underscore the economic power of the maker
movement.

trace the influence of the Industrial Revolution
on the maker movement.

suggest that mass-production is incompatible
with the modern economy.

--- PAGE 221 ---
4.

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

This passage is from Barbara Jordan’s keynote address
at the 1976 Democratic National Convention. A Texas
native, Jordan was the first African-American woman to
represent the Deep South in Congress,

It was one hundred and forty-four years ago that
members of the Democratic Party first met in
convention to select a Presidential candidate. A lot of
years passed since 1832, and during that time it would
have been most unusual for any national political party
to ask a Barbara Jordan to deliver a keynote address.

But tonight, here I am. And | feel that notwithstanding
the past that my presence here is one additional bit of
evidence that the American Dream need not forever be
deferred.

Now that I have this grand distinction, what in the
world am J supposed to say? I could list the problems
which cause people to feel cynical, angry, frustrated:
problems which include lack of integrity in government;
the feeling that the individual no longer counts; feeling
that the grand American experiment is failing or has
failed. I could recite these problems, and then | could
sit down and offer no solutions. But I don’t choose to do
that either. The citizens of America expect more.

We are a people in search of a national community.
We ate a people trying not only to solve the problems of
the present, unemployment, inflation, but we are
attempting on a larger scale to fulfill the promise of
America, We are attempting to fulfill our national purpose,
to create and sustain a society in which all of us are equal.

And now we must look to the future. Let us heed the
voice of the people and recognize their common sense.
If we do not, we not only blaspheme our political
heritage, we ignore the common ties that bind all
Americans, Many fear the future. Many are distrustful
of their leaders, and believe that their yoices are never
heard. Many seek only to satisfy their private interests.
But this is the great danger America faces — that we will
cease to be one nation and become instead a collection
of interest groups: city against suburb, region against
region, individual against individual; each seeking to
satisfy private wants. If that happens, who then will speak
for America? Who then will speak for the common good?

This is the question which must be answered in 1976:
Are we to be one people bound together by common
spirit, sharing in a common endeavor; or will we become
a divided nation? For all of its uncertainty, we cannot
flee the future. We must address and master the future
together. It can be done if we restore the belief that we
share a sense of national community, that we share a
common national endeavor.

222

There is no executive order; there is no law that
can require the American people to form a national
community. This we must do as individuals, and if we

50 do it as individuals, there is no President of the United
States who can veto that decision.

As a first step, we must restore our belief in
ourselves. We are a generous people, so why can't we
be generous with each other?

And now, what are those of us who are elected public
officials supposed to do? We call ourselves “public
servants” but I'll tel] you this: We as public servants
must set an example for the rest of the nation. It is
hypocritical for the public official to admonish and
60 exhort the people to uphold the common good if we

are derelict in upholding the common good. More is

required of public officials than slogans and handshakes
and press releases.

If we promise as public officials, we must deliver.

65 If we as public officials propose, we must produce.

If we say to the American people, “It is time for you to

be sacrificial” — sacrifice. And again, if we make

mistakes, we must be willing to admit them. What we
have to do is strike a balance between the idea that

70 government should do everything and the idea that
government ought to do nothing.

Let there be no illusions about the difficulty of
forming this kind of a national community. It’s tough,
difficult, not easy, But a spirit of harmony will survive

75 in America only if each of us remembers, when self-

interest and bitterness seem to prevail, that we share a

common destiny.

We cannot improve on the system of government
handed down to us by the founders of the Republic,

80 There is no way to improve upon that. But what we can
do is to find new ways to implement that system and
realize our destiny.

55

The passage’s discussion of problems facing the
American people (lines 12-17) primarily serves to

A) demonstrate the importance of a national
community,

indicate some attitudes that the author rejects.
explain that Americans are justified in fearing
the future.

B)
C)

D) emphasize the importance of local communities.

--- PAGE 222 ---
ee eo

<
5
i
i
f
x
&
§
F4
5
3

2
§
@

PREG AER VENEER ID DAF E RENTERS DERE MEI LH

SR aP ES RNR DEERME RN RINE LEE ITEC NS

FS
§
$
g
2
a
&

te

The author’s discussion of fear and distrust in
lines 30-32 primarily serves to

A) call attention to the central role of confidence
in effective leadership.

B) emphasize the importance of strong regional
identities.

C) point out some factors that pose a threat to
national cohesion.

D) demonstrate the necessity of electing powerful
representatives.

The reference to interest groups in line 35 primarily
serves to

A) defend an action.

B) call attention to a risk.

C) describe an unlikely scenario.
D) propose a course of action,

Jordan’s reference to the future in line 43 serves to

A) refute a widely accepted claim.

B) justify a controversial belief.

C) propose a novel alternative.

D) point out an inevitable occurrence.

223

5

The function of the quotation marks in lines 55-57
is to

A) indicate some unexpected tasks associated
with public office.

B) suggest that certain politicians are not living
up to their responsibilities.

C) praise politicians for their commitment to
to civic life.

D) implore the American people to consider the
common good.

The reference to “slogans and handshakes and
press releases” (lines 62-63) primarily serves to

A) point out superficial actions that fail to
address underlying problems.

B) call attention to the public aspect of political
office.

C) suggest that politicians should increase their
interactions with constituents.

D) emphasize the importance of collaboration
between politicians and citizens.

--- PAGE 223 ---
5.

10

Wee)

20

25

30

35

40

45

The following passage is adapted from Julian Jackson,
“New Research Suggests Dinosaurs Were Warm-Blooded
and Active’ © 2011 by Julian Jackson.

New research from the University of Adelaide has
added to the debate about whether dinosaurs were cold-
blooded and sluggish or warm-blooded and active.
Professor Roger Seymour from the University's School
of Barth & Environmental Sciences has applied the
latest theories of human and animal anatomy and
physiology to provide insight into the lives of
dinosaurs.

Human thigh bones have tiny holes — known as the
“nutrient foramen” — on the shaft that supply blood to
living bone cells inside, New research has shown that
the size of those holes is related to the maximum rate
that a person can be active during aerobic exercise.
Professor Seymour has used this principle to evaluate
the activity levels of dinosaurs.

“Far from being lifeless, bone cells have a relatively
high metabolic rate and they therefore require a large
blood supply to deliver oxygen. On the inside of the
bone, the blood supply comes usuaily from a single
artery and vein that pass through a hole on the shaft —
the nutrient foramen,” he says.

Professor Seymour wondered whether the size of
the nutrient foramen might indicate how much blood
was necessary to keep the bones in good repair. For
example, highly active animals might cause more bone
‘microfractures,’ requiring more frequent repairs by the
bone cells and therefore a greater blood supply. “My
aim was to see whether we could use fossil bones of
dinosaurs to indicate the level of bone metabolic rate
and possibly extend it to the whole body's metabolic
rate,” he says. “One of the big controversies among
paleobiologists is whether dinosaurs were cold-blooded
and sluggish or warm-blooded and active. Could the
size of the foramen be a possible gauge for dinosaur
metabolic rate?”

Comparisons were made with the sizes of the holes
in living mammals and reptiles, and their metabolic
rates. Measuring mammals ranging from mice to
elephants, and reptiles from lizards to crocodiles, one
of Professor Seymour's Honors students, Sarah Smith,
combed the collections of Australian museums,
photographing and measuring hundreds of tiny holes in
thigh bones.

“The results were unequivocal. The sizes of the holes
were related closely to the maximum metabolic rates
during peak movement in mammals and reptiles,”
Professor Seymour says. “The holes found in mammals
were about 10 times larger than those in reptiles.”

224

These holes were compared fo those of fossil
50 dinosaurs. Dr. Don Henderson, Curator of
Dinosaurs from the Royal Tyrrell Museum in
Alberta, Canada, and Daniela Schwarz-Wings from
the Museum fiir Naturkunde Humboldt University
Berlin, Germany measured the holes in 10 species of
dinosaurs from five different groups, including
bipedal and quadrupedal carnivores and herbivores,
weighing 50kg to 20,000kg.

“On a relative comparison to eliminate the
differences in body size, all of the dinosaurs had
holes in their thigh bones larger than those of
mammals,” Professor Seymour says.

“The dinosaurs appeared to be even more active
than the mammals. We certainly didn't expect to see
that. These results provide additional weight to
65 theories that dinosaurs were warm-blooded and

highly active creatures, rather than cold-blooded
and sluggish.”
Professor Seymour says following the results of
this study, it’s likely that a simple measurement of
70 foramen size could be used to evaluate maximum
activity levels in other vertebrate animals.

55

60

The reference to the size of the foramen (line 34)
primarily serves to

A) compare the metabolic rates of different
dinosaur species.
point out that dinosaurs were able to survive

in a range of climates.

B)
C) indicate a means of resolving a scientific
dispute.

suggest that mammals and reptiles were once
closer in size than they are today.

D)

The statement that the dinosaurs “appeared to

be even more active than the mammals”
(lines 62-63) serves to

A) emphasize a conventional belief.

B) defend a finding.

C) propose a controversial claim.

D) call attention to a surprising discovery.

--- PAGE 224 ---
LaeenncrsraaeacAet

Sata he SHBOR MESS at Py NONE ORES EL ANONS

3
i
3
£
|
i
4
i
B3
i

a
4
i
4
&
i
i
z
:
4
F
i
3
}
&
3
i
g
:
i

:
f

:
i
t
HI
§
i

3

}
;

i
j

5

6.

The following passage is adapted from “Scientists
Discover Salty Aquifer, Previously Unknown Microbial
Habitat Under Antarctica,” © 2015 by Dartmouth College.

Using an airborne imaging system for the first time
in Antarctica, scientists have discovered a vast network
of unfrozen salty groundwater that may support previously
unknown microbial life deep under the coldest, driest
desert on our planet. The findings shed new light on
ancient climate change on Earth and provide strong
evidence that a similar briny aquifer could support
microscopic life on Mars. The scientists used SkyTEM,
an airborne electromagnetic sensor, to detect and map

10 otherwise inaccessible subterranean features.

15

20

25

The system uses an antennae suspended beneath
a helicopter to create a magnetic field that reveals the
subsurface to a depth of about | ,000 feet. Because a
helicopter was used, large areas of rugged terrain could
be surveyed. The SkyTEM team was funded by the
National Science Foundation and led by researchers
from the University of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK), and
Dartmouth College, which oversees the NSF’s Sky TEM
project.

“These unfrozen materials appear to be relics of
past surface ecosystems and our findings provide
compelling evidence that they now provide deep
subsurface habitats for microbial life despite extreme
environmental conditions,” says lead author Jill Mikucki,
an assistant professor at UTK. “These new below-
ground visualization technologies can also provide insight
on glacial dynamics and how Antarctica responds to
climate change.”

Co-author Dartmouth Professor Ross Virginia is

30 SkyTEM’s co-principal investigator and director of

35

40

Dartmouth's Institute of Arctic Studies. “This project is
studying the past and present climate to, in part,
understand how climate change in the future will affect
biodiversity and ecosystem processes,” Virginia says.
“This fantastic new view beneath the surface will help
us sort out competing ideas about how the McMurdo
Dry Valleys have changed with time and how this history
influences what we see today.”

The researchers found that the unfrozen brines form
extensive, interconnected aquifers deep beneath glaciers
and lakes and within permanently frozen soils. The
brines extend from the coast to at least 7.5 miles inland
in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, the largest ice-free region
in Antarctica. The brines could be due to freezing and/or

45 deposits. The findings show for the first time that the

Dry Valleys’ lakes are interconnected rather than isolated;
connectivity between lakes and aquifers is important in
sustaining ecosystems through drastic climate change,
such as lake dry-down events. The findings also challenge

225

50 the assumption that parts of the ice sheets below the
pressure melting point are devoid of liquid water.

In addition to providing answers about the biological
adaptations of previously unknown ecosystems that
persist in the extreme cold and dark of the Antarctic

55 winter, the new study could help scientists to
understand whether similar conditions might exist
elsewhere in the solar system, specifically beneath the
surface of Mars, which has many similarities to the
Dry Valleys, Overall, the Dry Valleys ecosystem —

60 cold, vegetation-free and home only to microscopic
animal and plant life - resembles, during the Antarctic
summer, Conditions on the surface on Mars.

SkyTEM produced images of Taylor Valley along
the Ross Sea that suggest briny sediments exist at

65 subsurface temperatures down to perhaps -68°F,
which is considered suitable for microbial life. One of
the studied areas was lower Taylor Glacier, where the
data suggest ancient brine still exists beneath the
glacier. That conclusion is supported by the presence

70 of Blood Falis, an iron-rich brine that seeps out of the
glacier and hosts an active microbial ecosystem.

Scientists’ understanding of Antarctica's
underground environment is changing dramatically as
research reveals that subglacial lakes are widespread

75 and that at least half of the areas covered by the ice

sheet are akin to wetlands on other continents, But
groundwater in the ice-free regions and along the
coastal margins remains poorly understood.

The reference to brines in line 44 primarily
serves to

A) offer an explanation.

B) point out a misconception,
C) refute a hypothesis.

D) define a term.

--- PAGE 225 ---
In context of the passage, the function of the sixth
paragraph (lines 52-62) is to

A) describe some characteristics of Antarctic
ecosystems not found elsewhere on earth.

B) compare the development of ecosystems in
Antarctica to the development of ecosystems
on Mars.

C) indicate a possible outcome of the SkyTEM
research in Antarctica.

D) explain how microscopic plants and animals
survive in extreme conditions.

The reference to microscopic animal and plant
life (lines 60-61) primarily serves to

A) emphasize the harshness of the Antarctic
climate.

B) describe the effects of iron on microbial life.
C) indicate the importance of research on glaciers.

D) compare an environment on Earth to an
environment on another planet.

226

--- PAGE 226 ---
3
3
}
:

sihiiecagpanciacntinten

RRO DIED SNORING itt

y
i
B

Regt ier ARIS R NCI SLOPE IA NO

rl ILE REM KS 9B ER NOAA SIN,

ESO Naa NTE i

:
A
‘
4
it
¢
:

PORE ANGINA Homiise wee pe

Explanations: Reading for Function Exercises

1.1B

What is the context for capturing, storing, and sharing pictures? They are all capabilities that people
found fascinating when they were first introduced. In the next sentence, the transition now
indicates that these things are no longer considered so impressive. In other words, they used to
be considered “novel” (new and interesting). B) is thus correct.

1.24

This question can be answered using the main point: big data reveals hidden connections. That is
essentially what A) says, so it is the answer. B) and C) are incorrect because the author's focus is
on the uses of data, not on news. D) is incorrect because the passage focuses on the possibilities of
data analysis, not its limits.

1.3B

Why mention Asimov? Because he predicted the current use of mass data sets all the way back in
the 1950s. In other word, Asimov “foresaw recent developments.” That makes B) the answer.

2.1C

Why does the narrator refer to the catalpa grove and elm tree? The answer is in the following
sentences. The statements that Trees were so rare in that country... and It must have been the scarcity
of detail in that tawny landscape emphasize that landscape was extremely bare, ie., barren, C) is
therefore the answer.

2.2D

This is a very straightforward question if you remember to back up a sentence. Remember that
the one thing you don’t want to do when answering a function question is start at the line
reference and keep reading from there. The previous sentence indicates that the Shimerdas were
famished for fruit after weeks on the ocean, the implication being that they did not have access to
fresh produce during their journey. That statement is most consistent with the idea of a “limited
range of foods” in D),

234A

The key to answering this question is to notice the contradictor but in line 63. This word indicates
a difference (=contrast) between Mrs. Shimerda’s housewifely abilities in her old life and her lack
of those abilities in her new life.

3.1A

Don’t make this question out to be any more complicated than it actually is. If you don’t
remember where Europe int the 1980s is mentioned, start from the beginning of the passage. You'll
find the reference immediately, in lines 1-2. Why mention that time and place? To introduce the
topic of the passage: hackerspaces. That makes A) the answer. There is no mention of the United
States in that paragraph, eliminating B) and C). D) can be eliminated as well because the author
says nothing to indicate that hackerspaces enjoyed exceptional popularity in Europe; he simply
states that they originated there.

227

--- PAGE 227 ---
3.2B

Consider how the argument is presented in this section of the passage. The sentence that includes
lines 16-17 is presented in “while x...in fact y” form: while the idea of hacking might have an iffy
reputation, hackerspaces are actually pretty great places. Why would the author mention the first
idea? To show that he knows that other people hold negative views of his topic. In other words,
he’s auticipating a potential criticism. That makes B) correct.

3.3.C

The line reference in the question is quite long, indicating that only a small part of it is likely to be
relevant. Start by focusing on the first (topic) sentence of paragraph, since that’s the place most
likely to give you the answer: In recent years, the city of Detroit has emerged as a hotbed for
hackerspaces and other DIY (“Do-It-Yourself”) experiments. That sentence tells you that the
paragraph will focus on Detroit. The only answer that corresponds to that fact is C), which
rephrases Detroit as “a particular city.” Indeed, if you continue to read the paragraph, you will
find that it provides a number of reasons for hackerspaces’ success in Detroit.

3.4D

Consider the context of the OmniCorp discussion. The topic sentence of the paragraph states that
the vast majority of {hacker]spaces are self-organized and not-for-profit. The transition For example at the
beginning of the following sentence indicates that OmniCorp is mentioned to support that idea.
Which answer corresponds most closely to the topic sentence? D). Self-organized = open and
flexible. In addition, the author mentions that OmniCorp hosts an open hack night that is open to
the general public, a statement that also supports D).

3.5B

Shortcut: the main point - makerspaces could transform economy - corresponds directly to B).

If you don’t remember where the reference to Wired magazine appears, scan the passage for that
title, focusing on topic sentences. As a shortcut look for the italicized word. It appears in the topic
sentence beginning in line 84 and indicates the makerspace movement has transformative potential.
If you keep reading, the last sentence (main point) directly supports B). A) is incorrect because
Chris Anderson is not a participant in the maker movement. C) is incorrect because the author
only draws a parallel between the changes wrought by the Industrial Revolution and those that
could result from the maker movement. D) is also incorrect because there is nothing to support
the idea that mass-production cannot exist in the modern economy - the author states only that
mass-customization will allow for a new wave of business opportunities,

4.1B

The key to this question is the sentence begun by the transition But in line 18. There, Jordan
indicates that she does not intend to focus on people’s dissatisfaction with the government and
with the state of the country in general. In other words, Jordan lists those problems specifically
for the purpose of rejecting the idea that she should focus on them. That makes B) correct.

4.2C

Like the answer to question 4.2, the answer to this question hinges on the transition buf - in this
case, the one that appears in line 33, immediately after the line reference. In that sentence, Jordan
indicates that the great danger (=pose a threat) is that America will be torn apart by special
interests and lose sight of collective goals (=national cohesion). That corresponds to C).

228

--- PAGE 228 ---
i
é
a

BS LON lie ie EN EIN,

i
f
g
:
2
i

|

ee aes aa

Soa ALTAR MN etgtae

‘
Fi
é
fi
2

é
4
§
iS
¥
é

4.3B

As in question 4.2, the key phrase is great danger (=a risk), which Jordan uses to “call attention to”
the threat that Americans will be split apart by an excessive focus on special interests.

4.4D

This question requires you to be as literal as possible; it also requires you to focus on the wording
of the sentence in which the key word (future) appears. What does that sentence say? We cannot
flee the future. In other words, the future is inevitable. That makes the answer D).

4.5B

Why do authors typically use quotation marks? To imply skepticism, a connotation that is almost
always negative. C) and D) are both positive, so they can be eliminated. Now, consider the
context; Jordan is describing politicians’ hypocrisy - that is, they behave in such a way that
contradicts their official titles. That corresponds directly to B).

4.6A

Like the previous question, this question involves a section of the passage in which Jordan
contrasts politicians’ positive public face with their incompetence in upholding the public good.
In that context, slogans and handshakes and press releases serve as examples of good-looking but
fundamentally meaningless gestures. The answer that corresponds directly to that idea is A).

5.1 C

The previous sentence states that the debate over whether dinosaurs were warm-blooded or cold-
blooded is a big controversy (=scientific dispute). In that context, the foramen is a factor (=a
means) that scientists can use to resolve that dispute. That corresponds directly to C).

§.2D

This is a very straightforward question if you focus on the most relevant information. In this case,
it’s the sentence immediately following the line reference. The statement We certainly didn’t expect
to see that indicates that the findings came as a surprise, making the answer D).

6.1A

This question is much simpler than it might initially seem. The key word is could, which indicates
that the author is speculating about a possible cause for the brines. In other words, the author is
proposing a possible explanation for how they were created, making A) the answer.

6.2C

Like the answer to the previous question, the answer to this question also depends on the word
could, this time in line 55, That word indicates that the author is again speculating about the
consequences of the SkyTEM research (=indicate a possible outcome) and makes C) correct.

6.3 D

Make sure you read the entire sentence in which the line reference appears. In that context, the
references to plant and animal life serve as examples of ways in which the Antarctic surface
resembles the surface of Mars. That corresponds directly to D).

229

--- PAGE 229 ---
Glossary of Function Words

Account for ~ explain

Acknowledge (a point) ~ recognize the merit or validity of an idea

Advocate ~ synonym for promote and encourage

Bolster - support, provide additional evidence for an idea

Concede (a point) - recognize the merit or validity of an opposing idea

Discredit ~ disprove (literally, demonstrate a lack of credibility)
SAT passages are typically concerned with weighing evidence, considering prevailing
theories, and proposing new explanations. Although authors and various experts cited
in passages may have strong opinions about what is and is not true, passages do not, as a
rule, contain sufficient information or evidence to definitively prove or disprove
anything. Discredit is therefore unlikely to appear as a correct answer.

Dismiss - deny the importance or validity of an idea

Downplay - deliberately understate, imply that something is unimportant

Evoke ~ summon, call up (a memory, impression, etc.), recreate through description

Explicate ~ explain in great detail

Highlight - emphasize, call attention to

Minimize - deliberately understate the importance of an idea. Synonym for downplay and
trivialize.

Mock - make fun of

Qualify - provide more information about a statement in order to make it seem less strong
or blunt, or to indicate the conditions under which it would be true.

For example, a statement like, “The SAT is the worst test EVER” is extremely strong (not
to mention a good example of a hyperbole).

To qualify it, however, you could say something like, “At least that’s what it feels like
when you're a junior in high school.” That sentence reduces the impact of the first

sentence, clarifies when and for whom it would be true, and makes it seem less extreme.

‘It can be helpful to know that qualifying phrases are sometimes parenthetical - that is,
they are found within parentheses or dashes - and are almost like asides to the reader.

230

--- PAGE 230 ---
>
:
y
t
:
H
7

i
i
)
i
4

ARNIS ORS

karst ath

IRAP ENE IS EAEIT SOE PRESS 0 MOEA MORAD NLS E

Se ea

PEON ENG Bt OE TEEN ye SAA SCENES OTL BAT TRAIN LO ARN GES MATEY SENSI

eas MENIAL NRSC ACEP REDE ARE RACE VE No FRY, =

For example, consider the following sentence:

In his discovery of the law of the gravity, which would transform the course of
scientific thought, Newton was struck by - if the story can be believed - an
apple that fell from a tree above the spot where he was reclining.

The phrase between the dashes is intended to suggest that this story may not in fact be
true. In other words, it is intended to provide information about the truth of ~ to qualify -
the idea that Newton was struck by an apple.

As discussed earlier, answer choices that contain familiar words used in unfamiliar ways
are generally correct since the second meaning itself is being tested. Since qualify is not
being used in its most common sense of “fulfill requirements for,” it has a higher than
average chance of being correct.

So here’s a shortcut: If you have difficulty coming up with an answer on your own and
see “qualify a statement” as an option, you should probably begin by taking a very close
look at it. This is NOT to say that you should choose it without thinking, simply that you
should consider it first, making sure to look back to the passage and see if it does in fact
describe the function of the statement or phrase in question.

Satirize - make fun of by using irony, sarcasm, or parody

Scoff at - make fun of, suggest that something is unworthy of serious consideration
Substantiate ~ give evidence or support for, back up

Undermine ~ weaken or attack the foundation of

Underscore ~ call attention to. Synonym for entphasize and highlight

231

--- PAGE 231 ---
Tone and Attitude

Tone and attitude questions appear infrequently, but you can plan to encounter one or two
of them on the exam. In most cases, they essentially require you to identify whether the
attitude of the author, or an individual discussed in a passage, is positive, negative, or
neutral. They may also ask you to identify the relationship between specific wording and the
tone. These questions are typically phrased in the following ways:

¢ What main effect does the quotation by Gupta (lines x-y) have on the tone of
the passage?

e The author would most likely view the events described in lines x-y as...
* The information in lines x-y suggests that Klein would view the “skeptics” with...

Most answers provided for tone questions are fairly moderate; however, you may
occasionally encounter more “extreme” options, which are typically incorrect. If an author's
attitude is positive, for example, the answer is more likely to be approving or appreciative
than excited; if the author's attitude is negative, the answer is more likely to be skeptical
than alarmed; and if an author uses strong language, the answer is more likely to be
emphatic or determined than melodramatic.

There are several reasons for this pattern: first is that, with the exception of historical
documents, passages tends to be relatively neutral in tone. Positive passages are slightly
positive, and negative passages are slightly negative. The second reason is that many science
passages concern arguments that have not yet been proven. As a result, authors are unlikely
to say that a given piece of evidence conclusively proves a new theory. Instead, they use
qualifying statements and say that evidence stiggests a theory has some merit. The second
statement is much more cautious than the first, and answers tend to reflect that fact.

Neutral Tone, Definite Opinion

While the terms “tone” and “attitude” are sometimes used interchangeably, they are not
precisely the same thing. An author can present information about a topic in a tone that is
relatively neutral but still have a distinct opinion about which ideas are correct and which
ones incorrect. A lack of strong language does not imply a neutral attitude. The
information necessary to figure out what the individual in question thinks will always be
present, even though you may have to read closely to identify it.

232

--- PAGE 232 ---
When tackling science passages, you should be particularly careful not to confuse a dry or

objective tone with an absence of opinion or point of view. SAT passages are, for all intents

and purpose, not just recitations of factual information. Rather, they are chosen because they

contain some sort of argument, or because they explain why a new theory is superior to the
: existing one. Although there will certainly be indications that the “old idea” has been
i rejected and the “new idea” accepted, the overall tone is likely to remain fairly neutral during
discussions of both.

Note, however, that answers indicating a lack of interest, e.g., indifferent, apathetic, or
resigned, are highly unlikely to be correct. The reason for this is simple. Authors
(particularly paired-passage authors) as well as individuals discussed in passages tend to
have distinct, often conflicting, points of view. If they didn’t, there would be nothing to test.
The only exception would involve a character in a fiction passage who demonstrated a clear
sense of detachment in a particular situation.

Let's start with a straightforward example:

The so-called machine-learning approach...links
/ several powerful software techniques that make it
possible for the robot to learn new tasks rapidly with a
relatively small amount of training. The new approach
5 includes a powerful artificial intelligence technique
i known as “deep learning,” which has previously been i
used to achieve major advances in both computer |
vision and speech recognition, Now the researchers have |
found that it can also be used to improve the actions of
10 robots working in the physical world on tasks that require
both machine vision and touch.

er Ni ts

é
;
:
&
3
3

The author's positive attitude is indicated by a series of specific words and phrases:

¢ make it possible
¢ powerful artificial intelligence technique
° major advances
* — intprove the actions
The author's tone, however, remains relatively restrained throughout the passage. He does

not, for example, say that that this technology is extraordinary, nor does he say that it is the
most important invention ever.

| Instead, he understates his enthusiasm by using qualifying words such as relatively small
i and major advance. His tone could therefore be characterized as appreciative or approving,
‘ but NOT enthusiastic or excited. It could also be described with more neutral terms such as
informative or analytical.

ARR Re S36 en TE

The ability to distinguish between tone and attitude can become very important when you
are asked about attitude alone. “Attitude” questions require you to focus on what an
individual thinks rather than the words used to express a particular viewpoint.

FAURE 2 DEM EL

233

--- PAGE 233 ---
wv

10

15

20

25

30

35

Playing Positive/Negative with Tone and Attitude Questions

As is true for SAT Reading questions in general, considering answer choices to tone and
attitude questions in terms of positive, negative, and neutral is a helpful and straightforward
strategy for eliminating incorrect answers and identifying correct ones.

Sets of answers to these questions typically contain both positive and negative options -
often two of each - so this is an overall reliable approach.

Let's look at an example:

The public has been worried about the safety of
genetically modified (GM) foods since scientists at the
University of Washington developed the first
genetically modified tobacco plants in the 1970s. In the
mid-1990s, when the first GM crops reached the
market, Greenpeace, the Sierra Club, Ralph Nader,
Prince Charles and a number of celebrity chefs took
highly visible stands against them. Consumers in
Europe became particularly alarmed: a survey
conducted in 1997, for example, found that 69 percent
of the Austrian public saw serious risks in GM foods,
compared with only 14 percent of Americans.

But as medical researchers know, nothing can really
be “proved safe.” One can only fail to turn up
significant risk after trying hard to find it—as is the
case with GM crops.

Although it might seem creepy to add virus DNA to
a plant, doing so is, in fact, no big deal, proponents say.
Viruses have been inserting their DNA into the
genomes of crops, as well as humans and all other
organisms, for millions of years. They often deliver the
genes of other species while they are at it, which is why
our own genome is loaded with genetic sequences that
originated in viruses and nonhuman species,

Could eating plants with altered genes allow new
DNA to work its way into our own? It is theoretically
possible but hugely improbable. Scientists have never
found genetic material that could survive a trip through
the human gut and make it into cells. Besides, we are
routinely exposed to—we even consume—the viruses
and bacteria whose genes end up in GM foods. The
bacterium B. thuringiensis, for example, which
produces proteins fatal to insects, is sometimes enlisted
as a natural pesticide in organic farming.

In any case, people have consumed as many as
trillions of meals containing genetically modified
ingredients over the past few decades. Not a single
verified case of illness has ever been attributed to the
genetic alterations.

40 Critics often disparage U.S. research on the safety
of genetically modified foods, which is often funded
or even conducted by GM companies, such as Monsanto.
But much research on the subject comes from the
European Commission, the administrative body of the

45 B.U., which cannot be so easily dismissed as an industry
tool. The European Commission has funded 130 research
projects, carried out by more than 500 independent teams,
on the safety of GM crops. None of those studies found
any special risks from GM crops.

Which choice best reflects the perspective of the
“proponents” (line 18) on genetically modified
foods?

A) They are necessary to combat hunger but
too costly to grow on a large scale.

B) They are an established part of the food supply
and have no harmful effects.

C) They produce poor-tasting crops and may
cause genetic alterations.

D) They damage the environment and leave
people vulnerable to bacterial infection.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 9-[1 (“a survey... foods’)

B) Lines 27-29 (“Scientists...cells’)

C) Lines 35 -39 (“In any...alterations”)
D) Lines 43-46 (“But...tool’’)

234

--- PAGE 234 ---
i
;
3

SISA ONAEMK Meats oop

LE SEA SBM REN NAGS ROLE NA IEIE PE NIN NG MM RHC NN KIO

NEEIEE RIND ALAS NP

¥
$
‘
z
z
E
A
¥
3

i

RRL AEN LBNL N AIM NTE N BER:

PARRA Sm Lhe SSSA AEE darn A

Before you start plugging in answers, think logically for a moment about the information
provided for you.

The question asks what “proponents” of genetically modified foods are likely to think about
these crops. By definition, a proponent is a person who is in favor of something, so the
answer to Question #1 must be positive. (Conversely, a question that asks about “skeptics”
will, by definition, almost certainly have a negative answer.)

You can of course go back to line 18 and check this out, in which case you'll find that
“proponents” are people who believe modifying food genetically is no big deal, but it isn’t
actually necessary to do so.

Playing positive/negative, you can eliminate C) and D) right away because both answers are
negative. A) is half-positive, half-negative, but the negative half is at odds with the idea of
“proponents.” If half of the answer is wrong, the whole answer is wrong. Still, if you’re not
fully comfortable crossing this answer out, you can leave it.

At this point, you can start plugging in the line references from Question #2, but again, think
about how the passage is organized. The entire first paragraph talks about opposition to GM
foods, so it’s extremely unlikely that lines 9-11 are correct. You can skip A) for the moment.
Likewise, the last paragraph starts off by mentioning critics. Lines 43-46 are located there, so
it’s a pretty safe assumption that D) isn’t right either.

If you need a little more context for B), back up and read from the beginning of the
paragraph. Lines 27-29 provide the answer to the question in the previous sentence: Could
eating plants with altered genes allow new DNA to seep into our own? The answer to that question
is not only “no,” but it does not directly support either A) or B).

The biggest trap you could fall into here is to think that you might be missing something and
either start rereading the passage for more context, or sitting and puzzling over the answers.
But if a set of lines don’t really fit, they don’t really fit. When that is the case, spending time
trying to find a relationship where there is none is just about the worst thing you could do.

Instead, move on and check lines 35-39, which clearly support C) in Question #1. Trillions of

meals containing genetically modified ingredients = an established part of the food supply, and
not a single verifiable case of illness = no harmful effects.

235

--- PAGE 235 ---
Inferring Attitude

Although answers to many attitude questions are indicated in the passage, some questions
may ask you to move a step beyond what is literally stated and infer what the author of the
passage or a person/group discussed in the passage would most likely think about a
particular viewpoint or individual(s).

These types of questions are always present in Passage 1/Passage 2 sets (we'll look at some
samples in Chapter 11), but they can also accompany single passages that discuss multiple

points of view.

Let’s look at an example:

The “researchers” (line 11) would most likely
view the theory described in lines 4-6 with

Sometime near the end of the Pleistocene, a band
of people left northeastern Asia, crossed the Bering
land bridge when the sea level was low, entered
Alaska and became the first Americans. Since the

5 1930s, archaeologists have thought these people were
members of the Clovis culture. First discovered in
New Mexico in the 1930s, the Clovis culture is known
for its distinct stone tools, primarily fluted projectile
points, For decades, Clovis artifacts were the oldest

10 known in the New World, dating to 13,000 years ago.
But in recent years, researchers have found more and
more evidence that people were living in North and
South America before the Clovis.

The most recently confirmed evidence comes from

15 Washington. During a dig conducted from 1977 to 1979,
researchers uncovered a bone projectile point stuck in
a mastodon rib, Since then, the age of the find has been
debated, but recently anthropologist Michael Waters
and his colleagues announced a new radiocarbon date

20 for the rib: 13,800 years ago, making it 800 years older
than the oldest Clovis artifact. Other pre-Clovis
evidence comes from a variety of locations across the
New World.

A) admiration because they offer a novel
perspective.

B) skepticism because it does not take important
new evidence into account.

C) hostility because it threatens to overturn
decades of research.

D) suspicion because it is based on an unreliable
methodology.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 1-4 (“Sometime... Americans)
B) Lines 6-9 (“First... points”)

C) Lines 9-10 (“For...ago”)

D) Lines 17-21 (“Since...artifact’’)

As discussed earlier, the passage follows a predictable pattern: it discusses an established
theory (the Clovis people were the first people to inhabit North America) and a new theory
that challenges it (a group of people inhabited North America before the Clovis arrived).

The author's fore, however, remains relatively neutral throughout the discussion of both
theories. For example, instead of saying that the theory that the Clovis were the first
inhabitants of North America is absolutely wrong, the author simply states that more evidence
suggests that this is not the case.

Despite this restrained language, the attitude toward the “old idea” is negative, whereas the
attitude toward the “new idea” is positive. We're going to use that information to answer
both questions. Because we have line references for the first question, we're going to answer
them in order.

236

--- PAGE 236 ---
eae

RRR RIPE RES HELENA GR RRS AEE NEEM ESE NES RMSE MR SEEMS Bit ARR RIESE IN HY

rin NIA NTA

:
:
4

Sry aateaibigaincte sai SCet9

Soy ARGC A Brain S BP ne

ARB ARSC SSE RT EIN ANE TRIPE EPO ALE GER

1) What’s the theory in lines 4-67
The Clovis were the first people in North America.
2) What do the researchers believe?

People were living in North and South America before the Clovis. (The Clovis were NOT the first
people in North America.)

3) What’s the relationship?

The information in steps 1 and 2 indicates opposing ideas, so the researchers are going to
disagree with the theory. That means we're going to look for a negative answer.

Now, we're going to consider just the first word of each option.

A) Admiration: positive. Cross out.

B) Skepticism: negative, relatively neutral. Keep it.

C) Hostility: negative, too strong. Assume it’s wrong.

D) Suspicion: negative, relatively neutral. Keep it.
Working this way, we're left with B) and D). B) makes sense because someone who believed
that the Clovis were the first people in North America would be overlooking the evidence
described in the second paragraph. D) doesn’t fit because there’s no information in the
passage to suggest that the advocates’ methods are unreliable. So the correct answer is B).
Now for the second question. You could go through and check each option individually, but
there’s a much faster way to find the answer. We’re looking for lines that support the idea
that the Clovis were the first people in the Americas, which is part of the “old idea.”
Because the passage is arranged so that the “old idea” comprises most of the first paragraph
and the “new idea” comprises the second paragraph, the correct lines must be in the second
paragraph. D) is the only option that contains lines in the second paragraph, so it must be

the answer. And indeed, those lines discuss evidence for the theory that the Clovis were not
the first people in the Americas.

237

--- PAGE 237 ---
Simplifying “Tone” Answers

Instead of just asking you to identify the author’s tone, tone questions will generally ask you
to identify ow the use of specific words or phrases contributes to the tone. Although these
questions may appear very complicated, their answers can be simplified considerably.

Let's look at an example. Just read the passage - don’t try to answer the question yet.

The sharing economy is a little like online
shopping, which started in America 15 years ago. At
first, people were worried about security. But having
made a successful purchase from, say, Amazon, they

5 felt safe buying elsewhere. Similarly, using Airbnb or

10

45

20

25

a car-hire service for the first time encourages people to
try other offerings. Next, consider eBay. Having started
out as a peer-to-peer marketplace, it is now dominated

by professional “power sellers” (many of whom started
out as ordinary eBay users). The same may happen with
the sharing economy, which also provides new
opportunities for enterprise. Some people have bought
cars solely to rent them out, for example. Incumbents

are getting involved too. Avis, a car-hire firm, has a share

in a sharing rival. So do GM and Daimler, two carmakers.

In the future, companies may develop hybrid models,
listing excess capacity (whether vehicles, equipment or
office space) on peer-to-peer rental sites. In the past,
new ways of doing things online have not displaced the
old ways entirely. But they have often changed them.
Just as internet shopping forced Walmart and Tesco to
adapt, so online sharing will shake up transport, tourism,
equipment-hire and more.

The main worry is regulatory uncertainty. Will
room-4-renters be subject to hotel taxes, for example?
In Amsterdam officials are using Airbnb listings to track
down unlicensed hotels. In some American cities,

peer-to-peer taxi services have been banned after
lobbying by traditional taxi firms. The danger is that

30 although some rules need to be updated to protect
consumers from harm, incumbents will try to destroy
competition. People who rent out rooms should pay tax,
of course, but they should not be regulated like a Ritz-
Carlton hotel. The lighter rules that typically govern

35 bed-and-breakfasts are more than adequate. The sharing
economy is the latest example of the internet’s value to
consumers. This emerging model is now big and
disruptive enough for regulators and companies to have
woken up to it. That is a sign of its immense potential. It

40 is time to start caring about sharing.

What main effect do the author’s statements about
the sharing economy in lines 35-40 have on the
tone of the passage?

A) They create an emphatic tone, conveying the
strength of the author’s convictions.
B) They create a resigned tone, focusing on the
_ inevitability of economic change.
C) They create a celebratory tone, praising
regulators for adapting.
D) They create a personal tone, describing the
author’s involvement in the sharing economy.

The answer choices include a lot of information, so it’s easy to feel overwhelmed.

One strategy for simplifying things is to just focus on the tone word in each answer and
ignore the rest of the information, You can think of the question as asking this:

238

What is the tone in lines 35-40?

A) Emphatic
B) Resigned
C) Celebratory
D) Personal

--- PAGE 238 ---
Approaching tone questions this way has both benefits and drawbacks. On one hand, you

have less information to deal with, and thus less potential for confusion. On the other hand,
you can’t rely on the information in the second part of each answer choice to help you figure
things out. If you can play positive/negative without too much difficulty, though, there's a
very good chance you can find your way to the answer.

Some questions may be best approached with a combination of strategies: you can play
positive/negative with the “tone” word to eliminate a couple of options, then consider the
full answers to decide between the remaining choices.

That said, let’s keep working through the simplified version:

i
;

35 ... The sharing
economy is the latest example of the internet’s value to
consumers. This emerging model is now big and
disruptive enough for regulators and companies to have
woken up to it. That is a sign of its immense potential. It

40 is time to start caring about sharing.

What is the tone in lines 35-40?

A) Emphatic
B) Resigned
C) Celebratory
D) Personal

i The next thing we’re going to do is ignore the options provided and answer the question in
our own words.

@
Pa
2

When we look at the section in question, we can notice that it’s positive. Phrases such as the
internet's value to consumers, immense potential, and It is time to start caring indicate that the
author thinks that the sharing economy is a pretty great thing. Resigned (accepting of a bad
situation) is negative, so B) can be crossed out. The word I, which would indicate a personal
tone does not appear, so D) can be eliminated as well.

A NR a8 IDLER PUA CT ANORDE

That leaves A) and C). The fact that celebratory is pretty strong while emphatic is more neutral
suggests that A) is probably correct. In fact, the lines in question - especially the last sentence
- do consist mostly of short, strong statements, which support A). Still, we don’t have quite
enough information to decide, so we're going to check out the full answers.

eC 0 INTEL IM NE

35 .. The sharing | Pg
economy is the latest example of the internet’s value to
consumers. This emerging model is now big and
disruptive enough for regulators and companies to have
woken up to it. That is a sign of its immense potential. It

40 is time to start caring about sharing.

What main effect do the author’s statements about
the sharing economy in lines 35-40 have on the
tone of the passage?

8
:
g
3
i
s
4

A) They create an emphatic tone, conveying the
strength of the author’s convictions.

B) They create a resigned tone, focusing on the
inevitability of economic change.

C) They create a celebratory tone, praising
regulators for adapting.

D) They create a personal tone, describing the
author’s involvement in the sharing economy.

RAT St: SALE NAW ENG BEN AONB REN NO SIV RE AOL GGA INE SENY EI

239

seal RA RAR ANA EAR O,

--- PAGE 239 ---
Shorteut: A) contains the word convictions, which is used in its second meaning. When most
students hear the word conviction, they picture a courtroom with a judge announcing
“Guilty!” But conviction is also the noun form of convinced. In this definition, convictions are
simply strong beliefs, and that’s the only use that makes sense. That alone is enough to
suggest that A) is the answer. And when you go back to the passage, it’s pretty clear that the
author strongly believes that the sharing economy is a big deal. So A) works.

The slightly longer way: Remember that when you're stuck between two answers, you want
to pick the most specific part of one answer to check. If the passage supports it, that answer
is right; if the passage doesn’t support it, the other answer must be correct by default.

In this case, C) provides more specific information: it indicates that the passage [praises]
regulators for adapting. When we go back to the passage, though, the only information we find
about regulators is that the author thinks they should have woken up to the sharing economy.
It does not actually say that they have adapted. So C) doesn’t fit, again leaving A).

Register: Formal vs. Informal

Register refers to a text's level of formality or informality. Many students assume because
the SAT is a Very Serious Test, all the passages must therefore be written in a Very Serious
Manner. But while it is true that many historical texts will be quite formal, some
contemporary passages may contain less serious parts.

For example, compare the following two excerpts. Passage 1 is taken from Daniel Webster’s
1850 speech The Union and the Constitution, Passage 2 is from a 2013 newspaper editorial.

Passage 1

I wish to speak to-day, not as a Massachusetts
man, nor as a Northern man, but as an American, and
a member of the Senate of the United States, It is
fortunate that there is a Senate of the United States; a

5 body not yet moved from its propriety, not lost to a just

10

sense of its own dignity and its own high responsibilities,
and a body to which the country looks, with confidence,
for wise, moderate, patriotic, and healing counsels.

It is not to be denied that we live in the midst of strong
agitations, and are surrounded by very considerable
dangers to our institutions and government. The
imprisoned winds are let loose. The East, the North,

and the stormy South combine to throw the whole sea
into commotion, to toss its billows to the skies, and

15 disclose its profoundest depths.

240

Passage 2

Yogi Berra, the former Major League baseball
catcher and coach, once remarked that you can’t hit
and think at the same time. Of course, since he also
reportedly said, “I really didn’t say everything I said,”

5 itis not clear we should take his statements at face
value. Nonetheless, a widespread view —in both
academic journals and the popular press—is that
thinking about what you are doing, as you are doing
it, interferes with performance. The idea is that once

40 you haye developed the ability to play an arpeggio on
the piano, putt a golf bail or parallel park, attention to
what you are doing leads to inaccuracies, blunders
and sometimes even utter paralysis, As the great
choreographer George Balanchine would say to his

15 dancers, “Don’t think, dear; just do.”

Perhaps you have experienced this destructive

force yourself. Start thinking about just how to carry
a full glass of water without spilling, and you’ll end
up drenched. How, exactly, do you initiate a telephone

20 conversation? Begin wondering, and before long, the
recipient of your call will notice the heavy breathing
and hang up.

--- PAGE 240 ---
15

Sp hee ng i ee RIE ENTIRE EGO LEN YI. EGA GALERIE

i
:
3

5 felt safe buying elsewhere. Similarly, using Airbnb or

10 out as ordinary eBay users). The same may happen with

The first passage is undoubtedly very formal. It contains extremely long sentences with
multiple clauses, sophisticated, abstract vocabulary and phrasing (propriety, agitations,
disclose its profoundest depths), and is filled with metaphorical language (imprisoned winds, toss
its billows to the skies). The tone could thus be described as elevated or lofty. Because Webster
uses the first person (I) throughout the passage, the tone could also be characterized as
personal.

In terms of tone and style, the second passage is the complete opposite of the first. The
sentences are far shorter and employ a much more casual or colloquial level of vocabulary
(blunders, end up drenched). It contains allusions (references) to popular culture,
e.g., Yogi Berra and baseball, and the author frequently uses the second person (you) to
address the reader directly.

In addition, it includes several humorous quotations, including one at the beginning that is
patently absurd (I really didn’t say everything I said), and a rhetorical question (How, exactly do
you initiate a telephone conversation?) that is used to give the impression that the author is
thinking things over as she writes. Taken together, these elements create a tone that is
informal or conversational.

Now, consider this excerpt from a passage we looked at earlier:

The sharing economy is a little like online
shopping, which started in America 15 years ago. At
first, people were worried about security. But having
made a successful purchase from, say, Amazon, they

a car-hire service for the first time encourages people to
try other offerings. Next, consider eBay. Having started
out as a peer-to-peer marketplace, it is now dominated

by professional “power sellers” (many of whom started

the sharing economy, which also provides new
opportunities for enterprise. Some people have bought
cars solely to rent them out, for example. Incumbents

are getting involved too. Avis, a car-hire firm, has a share
in a sharing rival. So do GM and Daimler, two carmakers.
In the future, companies may develop hybrid models,
listing excess capacity (whether vehicles, equipment or
office space) on peer-to-peer rental sites.

In comparison to the examples we just looked at, this one falls somewhere in the middle.

It doesn’t contain the sophisticated vocabulary and complex syntax (word order) of the first
passage, but neither does it include the casual, humorous aspects of the second passage. It
simply presents an argument - people are initially nervous about the sharing economy, but
their concerns disappear when they participate in it - and supports it with various pieces of
evidence. The tone is straightforward and moderately serious.

Even though the author clearly has a positive attitude toward the sharing economy, the tone

could also be described as informative, analytical, or objective. These tones are associated
with a third person point of view (le/she/it).

241

--- PAGE 241 ---
in

Certainty and Uncertainty

While SAT authors are rarely over-the-top extreme, they do sometimes voice some very
strong opinions. Writing that is emphatic, decisive, vehement, resolute, or full of conviction
tends to have some pronounced characteristics:

¢  Itcontains short, blunt declarations, e.g., There is no compelling proof that it’s true.
* Itcontains strong words and phrases, e.g., there is no doubt, certainly, only, and most.

* It lacks qualifying words or phrases such as sometintes, frequently, or ntight that would
soften its meaning,

For example, compare the following two statements:

1) Technology changes everything.

2) In some circumstances, technology has the potential to change things.
The two sentences focus on the same subject, but they do so in very different ways.

The first sentence is striking because it is so short and to-the-point. It simply says what it has
to say, and that’s that. Its tone could thus be described as emphatic or decisive.

The second sentence, on the other hand, is filled with qualifying phrases (some, has the
potential to be) that tell us that the author wants to avoid making an overly strong statement.
Its tone could be described as tentative, hesitant, or cautious.

On the SAT, you are likely to encounter many instances of speculative tones, In such cases,
the author will discuss hypothetical situations - ones that have not actually occurred but that
could occur - and will use words such as could, might, probably, and perhaps.

For example:

A better understanding of archaea’s lifestyle and
role in nitrogen cycles not only would rewrite ecology
textbooks. It could also have practical applications,
such as devising natural ways to boost a soil’s nitrogen
content without needing to use chemical fertilizers, or
designing sewage treatment plants that employ microbes
to remove nitrogenous waste more efficiently, or
understanding which microbes produce global-warming
gases such as nitrous oxide.

In this passage, the word could indicates a speculative or hypothetical tone. The author is
discussing the potential applications of knowledge regarding archaea’s lifestyle and role in
nitrogen cycles - knowledge and applications that do not currently exist but that might exist
in the future.

242

--- PAGE 242 ---
In some cases, rhetorical questions can also indicate a lack of certainty:

Most of us are very familiar with the idea that our
planet is nothing more than a tiny speck orbiting a
typical star, somewhere near the edge of an otherwise
un-noteworthy galaxy. In the midst of a universe

5 populated by billions of galaxies that stretch out to our
cosmic horizon, we are led to believe that there is
| nothing special or unique about our location.
But what is the evidence for this cosmic

humility? And how would we be able to tell if we
10 were in a special place? Astronomers typically gloss
; over these questions, assuming our own typicality
sufficiently obvious to warrant no further discussion.
To entertain the notion that we may, in fact, have a
i special location in the universe is, for many,
15 unthinkable. Nevertheless, that is exactly what some
i smal] groups of physicists around the world have
recently been considering.

The questions at the beginning of the second paragraph are intended to cast doubt on the
statement that we are led to believe that there is nothing special or unique about our location. They
indicate that the author does not truly believe the usual answers to these questions, which
astronomers typically gloss over (treat superficially). We can therefore describe both his tone
and his attitude as uncertain or tentative. Alternately, the fact that he is mulling these
questions over gives his writing a reflective tone as well.

H
?
4
4
$
:

Note: One common point of confusion stems from the presence of counterarguments - that
is, ideas that contradict or weaken arguments presented in the passage. In some cases, as in
the example above, authors will be genuinely uncertain about answers to questions, or about
where they stand on particular issues. In most instances, however, they will come firmly
down on one side. You should therefore be careful with the word ambivalent if you ever
encounter it in an answer choice. To date, this word ~ a staple of the old SAT ~ has not
appeared on any released exams, but you should be aware of this pitfall just in case.

NI SY Nin OR npn RAS EISS SPOUSE ERE RCLLE

If you are asked to consider the big picture and find yourself confused about what the
author thinks, you should refer back to the end of the conclusion because that is where the
author is most likely to reaffirm the main point. You can also scan the passage for
contradictors such as but and however since “new ideas” usually appear after them.

A WO AEE Aa NPR ER LED AES

Humor, Sarcasm, and Irony

Given the rarity with which tone questions appear, as well as the SAT’s focus on testing
relatively straightforward concepts such as informality and approval, the chances of your
being asked about a genuinely humorous or sarcastic portion of a passage is extremely low.
If they do appear, answers involving humor, mockery, and sarcasm are unlikely to be correct
for the simple reason that they are inconsistent with the relatively moderate, neutral tone of
most passages. That said, these are concepts that students frequently find confusing, and |
am discussing them here for the sake of thoroughness.

3
3
i
i
'

: 243

--- PAGE 243 ---
If you do ever encounter humor in an SAT passage, it will almost certainly not be the
obvious, over-the-top, laugh-out-loud type of humor that you probably associate with that
word. Rather, it will be based on wordplay that either involves punning on alternate
meanings of words, or using words to mean the opposite of what they normally mean (the
literary equivalent of a kid who rolls his eyes and says “great” when he’s asked to stop
playing video games and take out the trash). It is up to the reader to recognize that meanings
are being flipped based on the context of the passage.

For example:

The ethics of eating red meat have been grilled
recently by critics who question its consequences for
environmental health and animal welfare. But if you
want to minimize animal suffering and promote more

5 sustainable agriculture, adopting a vegetarian diet
might be the worst possible thing you could do.

In the first line, the author puns on the word grilled by using it in its second meaning
(“question intensely”) while simultaneously associating it with its first meaning (“cooking
food ona grill”). The play on words creates a humorous tone.

In context of the unexpected assertion that the author makes in the next sentence (being a
vegetarian is bad for animals and agriculture) the wordplay also creates a tone of mockery
and sarcasm toward people who believe that eating meat is unethical.

Let’s look at another example:

...To their senses, are wornen made slaves, because
itis by their sensibility that they obtain present power,
And will moralists pretend to assert, that this is the
condition in which one half of the human race should
5 be encouraged to remain with listless inactivity and
stupid acquiescence? Kind instructors! what were we
created for? To remain, it may be said, innocent; they
mean in a state of childhood. We might as well never
have been born, unless it were necessary that we should
10 be created to enable man to acquire the noble privilege
of reason, the power of discerning good from evil,
whilst we lie down in the dust from whence we were
taken, never to rise again,

If you are ever directly tested on a sarcastic or mocking tone, there is a significant possibility
that it will appear in the context of a historical document. Because authors of these passages
tend to hold very strong views, they are more likely to use emotionally charged language.

In the passage above, for example, the author (Mary Wollstonecraft) rails against the fact
that women are kept in a state of perpetual childhood and not permitted to develop their
powers of reason the way men are. In that context, her reference to kind instructors in line 6
cannot be taken literally. Instead, she is implying that these people are exactly the opposite
of kind. Her tone can thus be described as ironic, sarcastic, or mocking.

244

--- PAGE 244 ---
‘
i
?
;
t
5
i
‘
f

a UMS NR a ER

:
g
E
f
:

“renin

oe See

HOS AOE 5 WE KAN BME IY a2 GRAPES AED SOU NN M8 NM

Common Tone and Attitude Words

Positive Negative Neutral
Agreement Ambivalent Analytical
Appreciative Critical Informative
Approving Disagreement Neutral
Moderate Confident Doubtful Objective
Informal Skeptical Personal
Proud Tentative
Sympathetic Uncertain
Amused Angry Academic
Awed/ Awestruck Disdainful Apathetic
Extreme Excited Fearful Indifferent
Humorous Furious Resigned
Hostile
Jeering
Mocking
Melodramatic
Sarcastic

245

--- PAGE 245 ---
1.

10

is

20

10

45

20

25

Tone and Attitude Exercises

Citrus greening, the plague that could wipe out
Florida's $9 billion orange industry, begins with the
touch of a jumpy brown bug on a sun-kissed leaf.
From there, the bacterial disease incubates in the
tree’s roots, then moves back up the trunk in full force,
causing nutrient flows to seize up. Leaves turn yellow,
and the oranges, deprived of sugars from the leaves,
remain green, sour, and hard. Many fall before harvest,
brown necrotic flesh ringing failed stems.

For the past decade, Florida’s oranges have been
literally starving. Since it first appeared in 2005,
citrus greening, also known by its Chinese name,
huanglongbing, has swept across Florida’s groves
like a flood. With no hills to block it, the Asian citrus
psyllid—the invasive aphid relative that carries the
disease —has infected nearly every orchard in the
state. By one estimate, 80 percent of Florida’s citrus
trees are infected and declining.

The disease has spread beyond Florida to nearly
every orange-growing region in the United States.

Chimps do it, birds do it, even you and I do it.
Once you see someone yawn, you are compelled to
do the same. Now it seems that wolves can be added
to the list of animals known to spread yawns like a
contagion.

Among humans, even thinking about yawning can
trigger the reflex, leading some to suspect that catching
a yawn is linked to our ability to empathize with other
humans. For instance, contagious yawning activates the
same parts of the brain that govern empathy and social
know-how. And some studies have shown that humans
with more fine-tuned social skills are more likely to
catch a yawn.

Similarly, chimpanzees, baboons and bonobos
often yawn when they see other members of their species
yawning. Chimps (Pan troglodytes) can catch yawns
from humans, even virtual ones. At least in primates,
contagious yawning seems to require an emotional
connection and may function as a demonstration of
empathy. Beyond primates, though, the trends are less
clear-cut. One study found evidence of contagious
yawning in birds but didn’t connect it to empathy.

A 2008 study showed that dogs (Canis lupus familiaris)
could catch yawns from humans, and another showed
that dogs were more likely to catch the yawn of a

246

Despite many generations of breeding by humanity,
no citrus plant resists greening; it afflicts lemons,
grapefruits, and other citrus species as well. Once a

25 tree is infected, it will die. Yet in a few select Floridian
orchards, there are now trees that, thanks to innovative
technology, can fight the greening tide.

The use of the phrases “jumpy brown bug” and
“sun-kissed leaf” in the first sentence establishes a
tone that is

A)
B)
C)
D)

critical.

mocking.
informal.
detached.

familtar human rather than a stranger. But efforts to
see if dogs catch yawns from each other and to
replicate the results with humans have so far had no
luck,

The author’s attitude toward the possibility that
yawning is a sign of empathy in non-primates is
best described as one of

A)
B)
C)
D)

skepticism.
enthusiasm.
approval.
hostility.

Which lines provide the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 2-3 (‘Once...same”)

B) Lines 6-9 (“Among...humans”)

C) Lines 14-16 (“Similarly... yawning”)
D) Lines 26-28 (“But...luck’’)

--- PAGE 246 ---
&
a
£

ENS ANE epee E RAEN Ep MES A BOLO PANS BEI LNAI S AEH GEAY RIS 8 TIS SE TABLED RE GOEL RISENER IRATE GINETE BANE NIZ rf

AA coe WEEN DEG ARES SAILS RS EE AN PMN DG ENE

10

15

20

10

i5

20

These are stimulating times for anyone interested
in questions of animal consciousness. On what seems
like a monthly basis, scientific teams announce the
results of new experiments, adding to a preponderance
of evidence that we’ve been underestimating animal
minds, even those of us who have rated them fairly
highly. New animal behaviors and capacities are
observed in the wild, often involving tool use—or at
least object manipulation—the very kinds of activity
that led the distinguished zoologist Donald R. Griffin to
found the field of cognitive ethology (animal thinking)
in 1978: octopuses piling stones in front of their
hideyholes, to name one recent example; or dolphins
fitting marine sponges to their beaks in order to dig for
food on the seabed; or wasps using small stones to
smooth the sand around their egg chambers, concealing
them from predators. At the same time neurobiologists
have been finding that the physical structures in our
own brains most commonly held responsible for
consciousness are not as rare in the animal kingdom as
had been assumed. Indeed they are common. All of this
work and discovery appeared to reach a kind of

Every time a car drives through a major intersection,
it becomes a data point. Magnetic coils of wire lie just
beneath the pavement, registering each passing car. This
starts a cascade of information: Computers tally the
number and speed of cars, shoot the data through
underground cables to a command center and finally
translate it into the colors red, yellow and green, On the
seventh floor of Boston City Hall, the three colors
splash like paint across a wall-sized map.

To drivers, the color red means stop, but on the map
it tells traffic engineers to leap into action. Traffic control
centers like this one—a room cluttered with computer
terminals and live video feeds of urban intersections —
represent the brain of a traffic system. The city's network
of sensors, cables and signals are the nerves connected to
the rest of the body. “Most people don't think there are
eyes and ears keeping track of all this stuff,” says John
DeBenedictis, the center's engineering director. But in
reality, engineers literally watch our every move,
making subtle changes that relieve and redirect traffic.

The tactics and aims of traffic management are
modest but powerful. Most intersections rely on a
combination of pre-set timing and computer adaptation.
For example, where a busy main road intersects with

247

crescendo last summer, when an international group of
prominent neuroscientists meeting at the University of

25 Cambridge issued “The Cambridge Declaration on

Consciousness in Non-Human Animals,” a document
stating that “humans are not unique in possessing the
neurological substrates that generate consciousness.”
It goes further to conclude that numerous documented

30 animal behaviors must be considered “consistent with

experienced feeling states.”

The use of the phrases “stimulating times” (line 1),
“what seems like a monthly basis” (lines 2-3), and
“preponderance of evidence” (lines 4-5) in the first
two sentences establishes a tone that is

A) dubious.
B) approving.
C) tentative.
D) disdainful.

25 a quiet residential street, the traffic signal might give
70 percent of “green time” to the main road, and
30 percent to the residential road, (Green lights last
between a few seconds and a couple minutes, and tend
to shorten at rush hour to help the traffic move

30 continuously.) But when traffic overwhelms the pre-set
timing, engineers override the system and make
changes.

What effect does the quotation by John
DeBenedictis in lines 16-17 have on the tone of
of the passage?

A) It creates a skeptical tone, implying that the
power of computers to control traffic may
be limited.

B) It creates an enthusiastic tone, emphasizing
the power of technology to ensure safety.

C) It creates an ominous tone, suggesting the
risks of unrestrained surveillance.

D) It creates a conversational tone, pointing out a
common misconception in everyday language.

--- PAGE 247 ---
§.

10

415

20

25

30

35

40

45

To understand what the new software —that is,
analytics —can do that’s different from more familiar
software like spreadsheets, word processing, and
graphics, consider the lowly photograph. Here the
relevant facts aren’t how many bytes constitute a digital
photograph, or a billion of them. That’s about as
instructive as counting the silver halide molecules used
to form a single old-fashioned print photo. The important
feature of a digital image’s bytes is that, unlike
crystalline molecules, they are uniquely easy to store,
transport, and manipulate with software. In the first era
of digital images, people were fascinated by the
convenience and malleability (think PhotoShop) of
capturing, storing, and sharing pictures, Now, instead of
using software to manage photos, we can mine features
of the bytes that make up the digital image. Facebook
can, without privacy invasion, track where and when,
for example, vacationing is trending, since digital images
reveal at least that much. But more importantly, those
data can be cross-correlated, even in real time, with
seemingly unrelated data such as local weather, interest
rates, crime figures, and so on. Such correlations
associated with just one photograph aren’t revealing.
But imagine looking at billions of photos over weeks,
months, years, then correlating them with dozens of
directly related data sets (vacation bookings, air traffic),
tangential information (weather, interest rates,
unemployment), or orthogonal information (social or
political trends). With essentially free super-compuling,
we can mine and usefully associate massive, formerly
unrelated data sets and unveil all manner of economic,
cultural, and social realities.

For science fiction aficionados, Isaac Asimov
anticipated the idea of using massive data sets to predict
human behavior, coining it “psychohistory” in his 1951
Foundation trilogy. The bigger the data set, Asimov said
then, the more predictable the future. With big-data
analytics, one can finally see the forest, instead of just
the capillaries in the tree leaves. Or to put it in more
accurate terms, one can see beyond the apparently
random motion of a few thousand molecules of air inside
a balloon; one can see the balloon itself, and beyond that,
that it is inflating, that it is yellow, and that it is part of a
bunch of balloons en route to a birthday party. The
data/software world has, until now, been largely about
looking at the molecules inside one balloon.

248

What effect does the word “imagine” (line 24)
have on the tone of the passage?

A) It creates a mysterious tone that suggests the
unlimited potential of technology.

B) It creates a skeptical tone that suggests the
necessity of resisting certain inventions.

C) It creates a speculative tone that encourages
the reader to consider a scenario.

D) It creates a defiant tone that emphasizes the
need to persevere in the face of adversity.

--- PAGE 248 ---
an ab MESON

epee acticon cnaeyareviee

3
{
2
Hy
é
§
2

AraC neh BRC

Fd
4
;
g
&
%
8
¢

OREN P Reo TEESE SRNR RAMA APIS, Bi CA ALI RAVNROI | RIOR HA TE RLS SSS LE

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

The following passage is adapted from Jane Austen,
Northanger Abbey, originally published in 1817.

No one who had ever seen Catherine Morland in
her infancy would have supposed her born to be an
heroine. Her situation in life, the character of her father
and mother, her own person and disposition, were all
equally against her.

Her father was a clergyman, without being
neglected, or poor, and a very respectable man, though
his name was Richard—and he had never been
handsome. He had a considerable independence besides
two good livings—and he was not in the least addicted
to locking up his daughters. Her mother was a woman
of useful plain sense, with a good temper, and, what is
more remarkable, with a good constitution. She had
three sons before Catherine was born; and instead of
dying in bringing the latter into the world, as anybody
might expect, she still lived on—lived to have six
children more —to see them growing up around her,
and to enjoy excellent health herself. A family of ten
children will be always called a fine family, where there
are heads and arms and legs enough for the number;
but the Morlands had little other right to the word, for
they were in general very plain, and Catherine, for
many years of her life, as plain as any. She had a thin
awkward figure, a sallow skin without colour, dark lank
hair, and strong features—so much for her person; and
not less unpropitious for heroism seemed her mind.

She was fond of all boy’s plays, and greatly preferred
cricket not merely to dolls, but to the more heroic
enjoyments of infancy, nursing a dormouse, feeding a
canary-bird, or watering a rose-bush. Indeed she had
no taste for a garden; and if she gathered flowers at all,
it was chiefly for the pleasure of mischief —at least so
it was conjectured from her always preferring those
which she was forbidden to take. Such were her
propensities —her abilities were quite as extraordinary,
She never could learn or understand anything before
she was taught; and sometimes not even then, for

she was often inattentive, and occasionally stupid.

Her mother was three months in teaching her only

to repeat the “Beggar’s Petition”; and after all, her

next sister, Sally, could say it better than she did.

Not that Catherine was always stupid—by no means;
she learnt the fable of “The Hare and Many Friends” as
quickly as any girl in England. Her mother wished her
to learn music; and Catherine was sure she should like it,
for she was very fond of tinkling the keys of the old
forlorn spinner; so, at eight years old she began. She
learnt a year, and could not bear it; and Mrs. Morland,
who did not insist on her daughters being accomplished

249

50 in spite of incapacity or distaste, allowed her to leave
off. The day which dismissed the music-master was
one of the happiest of Catherine's life. Her taste for
drawing was not superior; though whenever she could
obtain the outside of a letter from her mother or seize

55 upon any other odd piece of paper, she did what she
could in that way, by drawing houses and trees, hens
and chickens, al! very much like one another. Writing
and accounts she was taught by her father; French
by her mother: her proficiency in either was not

60 remarkable, and she shirked her lessons in both
whenever she could. What a strange, unaccountable
character!—for with all these symptoms of profligacy
at ten years old, she had neither a bad heart nor a bad
temper, was seldom stubborn, scarcely ever

65 quarrelsome, and very kind to the little ones, with
few interruptions of tyranny; she was moreover noisy
and wild, hated confinement and cleanliness, and
loved nothing so well in the world as rolling down the
green slope at the back of the house.

Lt
What effect does the phrase “What a strange,

unaccountable character!” (lines 61-62) have on
the tone of the passage?

A) It creates a harsh tone that suggests
Catherine’s parents are responsible for her
educational deficiencies.

B) It creates a gently mocking tone that implies
Catherine’s shortcomings are not unusual in
a young girl.

C) It creates a puzzled tone that emphasizes the
inexplicable nature of Catherine’s difficulties.

D) It creates a resigned tone that suggests
Catherine’s difficulties are irreversible,

--- PAGE 249 ---
7.

5

10

415

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

This passage is adapted from Jamaica Kincaid,
Annie John, © 1985 Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
The protagonist is a girl growing up in the Caribbean,

It was the first day of a new term, Miss Nelson
said, so we would not be attending to any of our usual
subjects; instead, we were to spend the morning in
contemplation and reflection and writing something she
described as an “autobiographical essay.” In the
afternoon, we would read aloud to each other our
auto-biographical essays. (I knew quite well about
“autobiography” and “essay,” but reflection and
contemplation! A day at school] spent in such a way!
Of course, in most books all the good people were
always contemplating and reflecting before they did
anything. Perhaps in her mind’s eye she could see our
future and, against all prediction, we turned out to be
good people.) On hearing this, a huge sigh went up
from the girls.

Half the sighs were in happiness at the thought of
sitting and gazing off into clear space, the other half in
unhappiness at the misdeeds that would have to go
unaccomplished. I joined the happy half, because I
knew it would please Miss Nelson, and, my own
selfish interest aside, I liked so much the way she wore
her ironed hair and her long-sleeved blouse and box-
pleated skirt that I wanted to please her.

The morning was uneventful enough: a girl
spilled ink from her inkwell all over her uniform; a
girl broke her pen nib and then made a big to-do about
replacing it; girls twisted and turned in their seats and
pinched each other’s bottoms; girls passed notes to
each other. All this Miss Nelson must have seen and
heard, but she didn’t say anything—only kept reading
her book: an elaborately illustrated edition of The
Tempest, as later, passing by her desk, I saw. Midway
in the morning, we were told to go out and stretch
our legs and breathe some fresh air for a few minutes;
when we returned, we were given glasses of cold
lemonade and a slice of bun to refresh us.

As soon as the sun stood in the middle of the sky,
we were sent home for lunch. The earth may have
grown an inch or two larger between the time I had
walked to school that morning and the time I went
home to lunch, for some girls made a small space for
me in their little band. But I couldn’t pay much attention
to them; my mind was on my new surroundings, my
new teacher, what I had written in my nice new
notebook with its black-all-mixed-up-with-white cover
and smooth lined pages (so glad was I to get rid of my
old notebooks, which had on their covers a picture of a
wrinkled-up woman wearing a crown on her head and a
neckful and armfuls of diamonds and pearls —their
pages so coarse, as if they were made of cornmeal),

250

55

60

1 flew home. I must have eaten my food. By half past
one, we were sitting under a flamboyant Lree in a
secluded part of our schoolyard, our auto-biographical
essays in hand. We were about to read aloud what

we had written during our morning of contemplation
and reflection. In response to Miss Nelson, each girl
stood up and read her composition. One girl told of a
much revered and loved aunt who now lived in
England and of how much she looked forward to

one day moving to England to live with her aunt; one
girl told of her brother studying medicine in Canada
and the life she imagined he lived there (it seemed
quite odd to me); one girl told of the fright she had
when she dreamed she was dead, and of the matching

65 fright she had when she woke and found that she

70

75

| 2 §

wasn’t (everyone laughed at this, and Miss Nelson

had to call] us to order over and over); one girl told of
how her oldest sister’s best friend’s cousin’s best friend
(it was a real rigmarole) had gone on a Girl Guide

jamboree held in Trinidad and met someone who

millions of years ago had taken tea with Lady Baden-
Powell; one girl told of an excursion she and her
father had made to Redonda, and of how they had
seen some booby birds tending their chicks. Things
went on in that way, all so playful, all so imaginative,
1 began to wonder about what I had written, for it was
the opposite of playful and it was the opposite of
imaginative. What I had written was heartfelt, and,
except for the very end, it was all too true.

Over the course of the passage, the narrator’s
attitude shifts from

A) eagerness to begin an assignment to uncertainty
about sharing her work.

B) disappointment about starting school to
excitement about the future.

C) disdain for some of her classmates to admiration
for her teacher.

D) doubt in her ability to keep up with her friends
to pride in her accomplishments.

Which lines provide the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines {9-23 (“] joined hearing... her’)
B) Lines 42-46 (“But...pages”)

C) Lines 57-60 (“One girl...aunt’”)

D) Lines 76-78 (“I began...true”’)

--- PAGE 250 ---
3
i

RDNA S00 SN TREAT

te hn GAME Na EA ONE Hl

oO Bh IMMER ART

4
t
:
i
:
EF
i
i
;
Hi
S

IVP EO SE RN

VFO praetg paso OR BEI IEA OER IS PIES EPR SN

10

415

20

25

30

35

40

45

This passage is adapted from Barry Schwartz, “More
isn't Always Better,” © 2006 by Harvard Business
Review.

Marketers assume that the more choices they offer,
the more likely customers will be able to find just the
right thing. They assume, for instance, that offering 50
styles of jeans instead of two increases the chances that
shoppers will find a pair they really like. Nevertheless,
research now shows that there can be too much choice;
when there is, consumers are less likely to buy anything
at all, and if they do buy, they are less satisfied with
their selection,

It all began with jam. In 2000, psychologists Sheena

Iyengar and Mark Lepper published a remarkable study.

On one day, shoppers at an upscale food market saw a
display table with 24 varieties of gourmet jam. Those

who sampled the spreads received a coupon for $1 off
any jam. On another day, shoppers saw a similar table,

except that only six varieties of the jam were on display.

The large display attracted more interest than the small
one. But when the time came to purchase, people who
saw the large display were one-tenth as likely to buy as
people who saw the smail display.

Other studies have confirmed this result that more
choice is not always better. As the variety of snacks,
soft drinks, and beers offered at convenience stores
increases, for instance, sales volume and customer
satisfaction decrease. Moreover, as the number of
retirement investment options available to employees
increases, the chance that they will choose any
decreases. These studies and others have shown not
only that excessive choice can produce “choice
paralysis,” but also that it can reduce people’s
satisfaction with their decisions, even if they made
good ones. My colleagues and I have found that
increased choice decreases satisfaction with matters as
trivial as ice cream flavors and as significant as jobs.

These results challenge what we think we know
about human nature and the determinants of well-being.
Both psychology and business have operated on the
assumption that the relationship between choice and
well-being is straightforward: The more choices people
have, the better off they are. In psychology, the benefits
of choice have been tied to autonomy and control. In
business, the benefits of choice have been tied to the
benefits of free markets more generally. Added options
make no one worse off, and they are bound to make
someone better off.

Choice is good for us, but its relationship to
satisfaction appears to be more complicated than we

251

50

55

60

65

70

75

had assumed. There is diminishing marginal utility in
having alternatives; each new option subtracts a little
from the feeling of well-being, until the marginal
benefits of added choice level off. What’s more,
psychologists and business academics alike have
largely ignored another outcome of choice: More of it
requires increased time and effort and can lead to
anxiety, regret, excessively high expectations, and
self-blame if the choices don’t work out. When the
number of available options is small, these costs

are negligible, but the costs grow with the number of
options. Eventually, each new option makes us feel
worse off than we did before.

Without a doubt, having more options enables us,
most of the time, to achieve better objective outcomes.
Again, having 50 styles of jeans as opposed to two
increases the likelihood that customers wil] find a pair
that fits. But the subjective outcome may be that
shoppers will feel overwhelmed and dissatisfied. This
dissociation between objective and subjective results
creates a significant challenge for retailers and
marketers that look to choice as a way to enhance the
perceived value of their goods and services.

Choice can no longer be used to justify a marketing
strategy in and of itself. More isn’t always better,
either for the customer or for the retailer.

Discovering how much assortment is warranted is a
considerable empirical challenge. But companies that
get the balance right will be amply rewarded.

What effect does the author’s reference to
“My colleagues and I” (line 32) have on
the tone of the passage?

A) It creates a dubious tone that conveys the
author’s skepticism toward Lyengar and
Lepper’s research.

B) It creates a reassuring tone that conveys the
power of individual experience.

C) It creates a conversational tone that conveys
potentially dry information in a personal
manner.

D) Itcreates a distraught tone that conveys the
uncertainty accompanying excessive choice.

--- PAGE 251 ---
The author’s attitude toward Iyengar and Lepper’s
research is best described as one of

A) skepticism.
B) approval.
C) defensiveness.
D) indifference.

Which lines provide the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines {7-18 (“The large...one”)

B) Lines 32-34 (“My...jobs”)

C) Lines 40-41 (“In...control’”)

D) Lines 48-49 (“There is...alternatives”)

The author would most likely consider the
viewpoint in lines 39-40 (“The more...are”

A) an example of a belief with which he does
nol agree,

B) a potentially valid assertion that has not yet
been conclusively proven.

C) astraightforward statement of fact.

D) a belief that has long been considered
controversial.

Which lines provide the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Line 15 (“On...table”)

B) Lines 40-43 (“In... generally”)

C) Lines 61-62 (“Without...outcomes”)
D) Lines 72-73 (“More...retailer’’)

252

--- PAGE 252 ---
i
x
z

HEA ANNENBERG Li

LORE TIS afta CECA SANIT 1 DLEMNTE LUELLA ig WIRE GS

Sin I NR Canoe Ong ebenegh © 4 DOE GRINS 50 DA NAS AREIN OR A PEORIA IE

eee nial sel

Explanations: Tone and Attitude Exercises

4.4C

Jumpy brown bug and sun-kissed leaf are both very descriptive phrases designed to draw the reader
in and engage him or her in the problem of citrus greening. They’re exactly the opposite of the
type of dry, objective language normally associated with scientific topics; in fact, they're fairly
casual, The author is trying to grab the reader’s interest by explaining things by adopting a
friendly, easily accessible manner. “Informal” is the only answer consistent with that goal.

2.1-2 A, D

The fastest way to answer this question is to recall that yawning in primates is discussed in the
first half of the passage, whereas yawning in non-primates is discussed at the end. If you do not
remember, the phrase Beyond primates in line 20 is a big clue to the section of the passage you
need to focus on. What does that line indicate? That the relationship between empathy and
yawning in animals other than primates is less clear-cut. That’s negative, but not overly so, The
only answer consistent with that language is “skeptical” ~ “hostility” is too strong. For 2.2, lines
26-28 are the only lines cited after line 20, so you can assume they are correct. Indeed, they
support the idea that yawning may not be related to empathy in dogs (that is, non-primates) by
indicating that these animals have not been shown to catch yawns from one another.

3.1B '

The three quotes provided are positive and support the idea that a lot of good research on animal
consciousness is currently being conducted, so the correct answer must be positive. “Approving”
is the only option that fits.

4.1D

Start by focusing on the language of the quote itself: Most people don’t think there are eyes and ears
keeping track of all this stuff. The most striking feature is the use of the word stiff - it’s a very casual
word, not one that normally appears in formal writing. In fact, that word creates an informal or
“conversational” tone, making the answer D). You do not even need to consider any of the other
information in the answer.

§.C

Despite the seeming complexity of the answer choices, this question can be answered without
consideration of any information in the passage - the only relevant piece of information is the
word imagine. Why would an author use that word? To encourage a reason to consider a possible
situation or result. In other words, to “speculate.” That makes C) the answer.

6.B

Consider the context in which the phrase in question appears. The narrator has just finished
describing Catherine’s lack of perseverance in her music lessons and her attempts to avoid
studying accounting and French - all perfectly normal behaviors for a mischievous young girl.
The narrator, however, describes these behaviors as something astounding and perplexing. The
key is to understand that the narrator’s exaggerated description is deliberate; he or she
understands full well that Catherine’s behavior is normal and is poking fun at the conventional
expectation of how a heroine should behave. The discrepancy between the behaviors themselves
and the narrator’s deliberately exaggerated surprise creates a “gently mocking” tone, making B)
correct.

253

--- PAGE 253 ---
7.1-2 A, D

The easiest way to answer these questions is to use the following shortcut: the question asks how
the narrator’s attitude shifts “over the course of the passage” — that is, from the beginning of the
passage to the end. As a result, the correct line reference can only appear in one of those two
places. The only line reference that corresponds to either of those places is lines 76-78, so D) is the
most likely answer to 7.2. It indicates that the narrator began to wonder about what [she] had written.
In other words, she felt “uncertainty” about sharing her work. A) is thus the answer to 7.1,

8.41

The key word is I. Whenever an author or narrator refers to him/herself in the first person, look
for an answer that includes the idea of personal, informal, or conversational. Those ideas are
present in C), making it the correct answer.

8.2-3 B, B

If you use the main point (too much choice = bad), 8.2 can be a very straightforward question,
and you are probably best off answering the questions in order. The discussion of Iyengar and
Lepper indicates that they ran the pioneering experiment that demonstrated the negative effects
of too much choice. Since the author agrees with Iyengar and Lepper, the correct choice must be
positive; therefore, B) is the only possible answer to 8.2. Looking at the following question, you
know that the correct set of lines must indicate that the author believes Iyengar and Lepper’s
research is accurate. You can also start by assuming that the correct lines are likely to be
somewhere close to the spot where Iyengar and Lepper’s names appear, making A) and B) top
candidates for the correct answer. Be careful with A) - although lines 17-18 do appear as part of
the discussion of Iyengar and Lepper’s research, they don’t discuss the results. In fact, they state
what the conventional wisdom would predict: people spent more time looking at the table with
more options, B) is the correct answer to 8.3 because it indicates that the author’s own research
has confirmed Iyengar and Lepper’s findings.

8.4-5 A, D

Again, using the main point is the fastest way to answer this pair of questions. Start by defining
the viewpoint in lines 39-40: The more choices people have, the better off they are. If you know that the
author’s point is that too much choice isn't good, you can jump to A) as the correct answer to 8.4.
For 8.5, the main point is almost invariably reiterated at the end of a passage. D) cites lines at the
end, so you can check that answer first. Sure enough, it reiterates the point that more isn’t always
better.

254

--- PAGE 254 ---
‘
2

Seen RON BEINT YEN TLR SNE IAA LOO NEEL BE ACM EE:

SAC Ope GIL OAL i ger woe PEGE

Nor ARAN; HAN REI TE

Rhetorical Strategy

Rhetorical strategy questions come in a variety of forms. They may ask about the point of
view from which a passage is written; how paragraphs or passages are organized; or how
counterarguments are presented. They are typically phrased in the following ways:

* This passage is written from the perspective of someone who is...
* Which choice best describes the structure of this passage?

* The statement in line x signals a shift from...

Point of View

There are several narrative points of view that you should be familiar with for the SAT.
Some questions may ask you to identify them directly, but other questions may test them
indirectly. In such cases, recognizing the point of view can provide an effective shortcut.

A first-person narrative is written from the perspective of the narrator. Usually the word I
will appear (first-person singular), but occasionally we (first-person plural) may also be used.
All personal anecdotes are, by definition, written in the first person.

For example, let’s return to this excerpt from Daniel Webster's speech. Notice the repeated
use of the word I;

I do not affect to regard myself, Mr. President, as
holding, or as fit to hold, the helm in this combat with
the political elements; but Ihave a duty to perform,and =}
I mean to perform it with fidelity, not without a sense
of existing dangers, but not without hope. I have a part
to act, not for my own security or safety, for lam |
looking out for no fragment upon which to float away
from the wreck, if wreck there must be, but for the
good of the whole, and the preservation of all; and there
is that which will keep me to my duty during this
struggle, whether the sun and the stars shall appear, or
shall not appear for many days. I speak to-day for the
preservation of the Union.

255

--- PAGE 255 ---
A third-person narrative, on the other hand, is written from an objective or impersonal
perspective and describes other people or things rather than the narrator him- or herself.

For example:

Every time a car drives through a major intersection,
it becomes a data point. Magnetic coils of wire lie just
beneath the pavement, registering each passing car. This
starts a cascade of information: Computers tally the
number and speed of cars, shoot the data through
underground cables to a command center and finally
translate it into the colors red, yellow and green. On the
seventh floor of Boston City Hall, the three colors
splash like paint across a wall-sized map.

Although this passage is highly descriptive, it focuses on events, not on the narrator. Unlike
the first passage, its tone is much more neutral and detached. The majority of SAT passages
are written from a third-person perspective.

Second person narrations are less common than either first- or third-person narrations, but
you may encounter them from time to time. They can address the reader directly by using
the word you, or indirectly by giving commands, For example, the following excerpt does
both of these things:

... Lhe idea is that once you
have developed the ability to play an arpeggio on the
piano, putt a golf ball or parallel park, attention to what
you are doing leads to inaccuracies, blunders and
sometimes even utter paralysis. As the great
choreographer George Balanchine would say to his
dancers, “Don’t think, dear; just do.”

Perhaps you have experienced this destructive force
yourself, Start thinking about just how to carry a full
glass of water without spilling, and you’ll end up
drenched. How, exactly, do you initiate a telephone
conversation? Begin wondering, and before long, the
recipient of your call will notice the heavy breathing
and hang up. Our actions, the French philosopher
Maurice Merleau-Ponty tells us, exhibit a “magical”
efficacy, but when we focus on them, they degenerate
into the absurd. A 13-time winner on the Professional
Golfers Association Tour, Dave Hill, put it like this:
“You can’t be thinking about the mechanics of the sport
while you are performing.”

Noticing pronouns can also provide a very effective shortcut if you encounter questions
asking you to identify where a shift occurs in the passage. To answer these questions, you
must be able to recognize key places in the development of the argument: where new or
contradictory information is introduced, where important ideas appear, and where “old
ideas” shift to “new ideas.” You should also pay close attention to changes in point of view.

256

--- PAGE 256 ---
For example, we’re going to take another look at this excerpt from Barbara Jordan’s 1976
National Democratic Convention speech:

Which choice best describes the shift that occurs
in line 20?

It was one hundred and forty-four years ago that
members of the Democratic Party first met in
convention to select a Presidential candidate. A lot of
4 years passed since 1832, and during that time it would
: 5 have been most unusual for any national political party i A)

A criticism of a situation to an acknowledgment
of its significance.
B) A discussion of a problem to a description of a

to ask a Barbara Jordan to deliver a keynote address.
But tonight, here Iam. And I fee! that notwithstanding
the past that my presence here is one additional bit of

problems which include lack of integrity in government; |

15 the feeling that the individual no longer counts; feeling i
that the grand American experiment is failing or has
failed. I could recite these problems, and then I could
sit down and offer no solutions. But I don't choose to do
that either. The citizens of America expect more.

20 Weare a people in search of a national community.
We are a people trying not only to solve the problems of
the present, unemployment, inflation, but we are
attempting on a larger scale to fulfill the promise of
America. We are attempting to fulfill our national

25 purpose, to create and sustain a society in which all of us
are equal.

i evidence that the American Dream need not forever be solution.

i 10 deferred. C) A personal reaction to a discussion of a general
Now that I have this grand distinction, what in the | concern,

i world am I supposed to say? I could list the problems i D) A presentation of a claim to a questioning of

i which cause people to feel cynical, angry, frustrated: that claim.

Like many SAT Reading questions, this one appears to be considerably more difficult than it
actually is. The most important thing to understand is that the question is asking about the
shift that occurs in line 20. By definition, a shift is a change from one thing to another, so to
answer the question, we must look at the information before line 20 as well as line 20 itself.

4
%
|
;
3
3

&

If we just look at the previous paragraph as well as the paragraph that line 20 begins, we can
notice that in the previous paragraph, the word I appears repeatedly, whereas the new
paragraph refers to we. The shift is from personal to general, making C) correct.

Some point-of-view questions may ask about the author or narrator's relationship to the
subject of the passage - that is, whether the author/narrator is personally involved, or
whether he or she is merely an interested observer. In such cases, it is important that you
notice the pronouns that the author uses throughout the passage. An author who is
personally involved will use personal pronouns (I, we), while an author who is not directly
involved will use impersonal pronouns (He, she, it, they).

Most authors of science and social science passages will be informed observers - people who
are strongly interested in and highly knowledgeable about their subjects, but who do not
actually participate in the events/research they describe, As a result, they will often
demonstrate a positive attitude toward their subjects. (Again: if they weren’t interested, they
wouldn’t bother to write about them in the first place.)

AN POM MRL LS ASCO LEAD ES HA AIOE PIVOTED A YA ENAMEL PIM ERD LENS ARE gh 9 IPO OLE G

257

--- PAGE 257 ---
10

45

20

In contrast, authors of fiction passages and historical documents may be either directly

involved or knowledgeable observers.

f : . : .
, :
For example, let’s return to this social science passage

Every time a car drives through a major intersection,
it becomes a data point. Magnetic coils of wire lie just
beneath the pavement, registering each passing car. This
starts a cascade of information: Computers tally the
number and speed of cars, shoot the data through
underground cables to a command center and finally
translate it into the colors red, yellow and green. On the
seventh floor of Boston City Hall, the three colors
splash like paint across a wall-sized map.

To drivers, the color red means stop, but on the map
it tells traffic engineers to leap into action. Traffic control
centers like this one—a room cluttered with computer
terminals and live video feeds of urban intersections —
represent the brain of a traffic system. The city’s network
of sensors, cables and signals are the nerves connected to
the rest of the body. “Most people don't think there are
eyes and ears keeping track of all this stuff,’ says John
DeBenedictis, the center’s engineering director. But in
reality, engineers literally watch our every move,
making subtle changes that relieve and redirect traffic.

The tactics and aims of traffic management are
modest but powerful. Most intersections rely ona
combination of pre-set timing and computer adaptation.

For example, where a busy main road intersects with
25 a quiet residential street, the traffic signal might give
70 percent of “green time” to the main road, and
30 percent to the residential road. (Green lights last
between a few seconds and a couple minutes, and tend
to shorten at rush hour to help the traffic move
30 continuously.) But when traffic overwhelms the pre-set
timing, engineers override the system and make
changes.

This passage is written from the perspective of
someone who is

A) actively involved in promoting traffic safety
throughout urban areas.

B) familiar with the activities of traffic engineers.

C) an employee of the traffic contro! center in
Boston City Hall.

D) opposed to the intrusion of traffic engineers
into everyday life.

This passage is descriptive or informative: it explains what traffic engineers do and how a
traffic control center functions, from an outsider’s perspective, The tone is neutral/ positive.

In addition to containing the most common description of a non-fiction writer, B)
corresponds to this perspective: someone informed about a subject but not directly involved.

Both A) and C) indicate personal involvement, eliminating them. Although that is not the
case for D), “opposed” is negative, and nothing in the passage suggests that the author
disapproves of traffic engineers’ role in everyday life. While you may be somewhat put off
by the fact that traffic engineers are literally watch[ing] our every move, there is no evidence
that the author feels that way, and you cannot project your own impressions onto the author.

Other point of view questions could ask about the narrator’s perspective in terms of age
(child vs. adult) or time, These questions tend to occur when passages discuss events that
took place at different times, often earlier, or when the narrator is looking back on an event.

In such cases, you must pay attention to tense - that is, whether the passage is written in the
present (is, are) or past (was, were). The action of a passage written in the present is taking
place as the author describes it, while the action of a passage written in the past has already
occurred.

On the next page, we’re going to look at an example. Pay attention to the passage’s point of
view and tense.

258

--- PAGE 258 ---
Se LSA ERMA IC Ree

Ae MONRO Ee

MG Ra HOA NEN TAM gd fag RN

OR ASSENMAE REE Aa 9 EE

RBDLSEILAB ig TERE sched

i

EN ARAM CORAL Yeh PA NNN A PAPE MRE SIE, ANOLE TS, LOIS TLIO

The following passage is adapted from a novel by Willa
Cather, originally published in 1918. The narrator has
been sent to live with his grandparents in Nebraska.

On the afternoon of that Sunday J took my first
long ride on my pony, under Otto's direction. After
that Dude and I went twice a week to the post-office,
six miles east of us, and I saved the men a good

§ deal of time by riding on errands to our neighbors.
When we had to borrow anything, I was always the
messenger.

All the years that have passed have not dimmed my
memory of that first glorious autumn. The new country

10 lay open before me: there were no fences in those days,
and I could choose my own way over the grass uplands,
trusting the pony to get me home again. Sometimes I
followed the sunflower-bordered roads.

1 used to love to drift along the pale-yellow cornfields,

15 looking for the damp spots one sometimes found at their
edges, where the smartweed soon turned a rich copper
color and the narrow brown leaves hung curled like
cocoons about the swollen joints of the stem. Sometimes
I went south to visit our German neighbors and to

20 admire their catalpa grove, or to see the big elm tree
that grew up out of a deep crack in the earth and had a
hawk's nest in its branches. Trees were so rare in that
country, and they had to make such a hard fight to grow,
that we used to feel anxious about them, and visit them

25 as if they were persons. It must have been the scarcity of
detail in that tawny landscape that made detail so
precious.

Sometimes I rode north to the big prairie-dog town to
watch the brown earth-owls fly home in the late afternoon

30 and go down to their nests underground with the dogs.
Antonia Shimerda liked to go with me, and we used to
wonder a great deal about these birds of subterranean
habit. We had to be on our guard there, for rattlesnakes
were always lurking about. They came to pick up an easy

35 living among the dogs and owls, which were quite
defenseless against them; took possession of their
comfortable houses and ate the eggs and puppies. We
feit sorry for the owls. It was always mournful to see
them come flying home at sunset and disappear under

40 the earth.

But, after all, we felt, winged things who would live
like that must be rather degraded creatures. The dog-town
was a long way from any pond or creek, Otto Fuchs said
he had seen populous dog-towns in the desert where

45 there was no surface water for fifty miles; he insisted that
some of the holes must go down to water—nearly two
hundred feet, hereabouts. Antonia said she didn't believe
it; that the dogs probably lapped up the dew in the early
morning, like the rabbits.

259

50 Antonia had opinions about everything, and she was
soon able to make them known. Almost every day she
came running across the prairie to have her reading
lesson with me. Mrs. Shimerda grumbled, but realized it
was important that one member of the family should

55 learn English. When the lesson was over, we used to go
up to the watermelon patch behind the garden. I split the
melons with an old corn-knife, and we lifted out the
hearts and ate them with the juice trickling through our
fingers. The white melons we did not touch, but we

60 watched them with curiosity. They were to be picked
later, when the hard frosts had set in, and put away for
winter use. After weeks on the ocean, the Shimerdas
were famished for fruit. The two girls would wander for
miles along the edge of the cornfields, hunting for

65 ground-cherries.

Antonia loved to help grandmother in the kitchen
and to learn about cooking and housekeeping. She
would stand beside her, watching her every movement,
We were willing to believe that Mrs. Shimerda was a

70 good housewife in her own country, but she managed
poorly under new conditions. 1 remember how horrified
we were at the sour, ashy-grey bread she gave her
family to eat. She mixed her dough, we discovered, in
an old tin peck-measure that had been used about the

75 barn, When she took the paste out to bake it, she left
smears of dough sticking to the sides of the measure, put
the measure on the shelf behind the stove, and let this
residue ferment. The next time she made bread, she
scraped this sour stuff down into the fresh dough to

80 serve as yeast.

Be

This passage is written from the perspective of

A) an adult recalling a memorable experience
that occurred earlier in his adult life.

B) an adult recounting a significant childhood
memory.

C) achild describing the development of a
friendship.

D) a narrator analyzing a story told to him by an
acquaintance,

--- PAGE 259 ---
The key to answering this question is the line All the years that have passed have not dimmed my
memory of that first glorious autumn. The narrator is looking back on an event that occurred
earlier in his life. Even though he’s describing what happened when he was a boy, the
phrase All the years that have passed indicates he’s no longer a boy at the time he’s telling the
story. Which answer does that correspond to? B).

If you didn’t notice that phrase and played process of elimination, you could eliminate D)
immediately because the passage is written in the first person, as indicated by the repeated
use of the word I.

Now we need to think carefully about the other answers, Let’s start with A). Yes, the
passage is told by an adult recounting a significant memory, but be careful ~ it’s not an adult
memory. The key phrase All the years that have passed (line 8) indicates that the narrator is
recounting events that occurred much earlier in his life. We can also reasonably infer that the
narrator was young at the time of the passage from the fact that he and Antonia were having
reading lessons (lines 51-53),

To eliminate C), think about the tense in which the passage is written. All of the verbs are in
the past tense (wert, rode, grumbled, followed), indicating that the action took place in the past.

Paragraph and Passage Organization

Paragraph and passage organization questions test your understanding of rhetorical
strategies on a large scale. Occasionally, they may also be paired with supporting evidence
questions. To answer these questions correctly and quickly, you must be able to identify
places where key ideas and arguments are introduced, as well as transition words that
indicate the relationships between those ideas.

If a question asks about the organization of a paragraph, you should begin by skimming for
important transitions within that paragraph. Then, consider the functions of those transitions
(compare/ contrast, indicate sequence of events, etc.) and what sorts of relationships between
ideas they convey.

If a question asks about the overall organization of a passage, you should focus on the end
of the introduction and the first sentence of each subsequent paragraph.

While you should be able to recognize how paragraphs and passages are organized, you
should not take the time to label each section of a passage as you read it. If you are
comfortable determining organization, you can most likely figure it out on the spot when
necessary. As a preparation strategy, however, you may find it helpful to label the various
parts of a passage (e.g., historical context, supporting example, counterargument, etc.).

You should also be on the lookout for changes in point of view, especially those involving
first-person narrations (I), because this information can provide an important shortcut for

both identifying correct answers and eliminating incorrect ones.

In some cases, you may also be able to simplify some questions by focusing on one part of
an answer choice and checking it against the corresponding part of the passage.

Starting on the next page, we’re going to look at some examples.

260

--- PAGE 260 ---
Which choice best describes the structure of the
first paragraph (lines 1-23)?

The sharing economy is a little like online
shopping, which started in America 15 years ago. At
first, people were worried about security. But having
made a successful purchase from, say, Amazon, they

5 felt safe buying elsewhere. Similarly, using Airbnb or A) A.comparison is presented and developed
a car-hire service for the first time encourages people to | through supporting examples
try other offerings, Next, consider eBay. Having started a ; ‘ .
out as a peer-to-peer marketplace, it is now dominated B) A principle is described, and an opposing

by professional “power sellers” (many of whom started principle is then introduced.

10 out as ordinary eBay users). The same may happen with C) The strengths and weaknesses of several

: the sharing economy, which also provides new ; competing explanations are discussed.

‘ opportunities for enterprise. Some people have bought D) A personal account of an experience is

: cars solely to rent them out, for example. Incumbents | provided, followed by a reflection on that
are getting involved too. Avis, a car-hire firm, has a share | experience.

15 ina sharing rival. So do GM and Daimler, two carmakers,
In the future, companies may develop hybrid models,
listing excess capacity (whether vehicles, equipment or

i office space) on peer-to-peer rental sites. In the past,

1 new ways of doing things online have not displaced the

; 20 old ways entirely. But they have often changed them.

Just as internet shopping forced Walmart and Tesco to
adapt, so online sharing will shake up transport, tourism,
equipment-hire and more.

The main worry is regulatory uncertainty. Will

25 room-4-renters be subject to hotel taxes, for example?

In Amsterdam officials are using Airbnb listings to track
down unlicensed hotels. In some American cities,
peer-to-peer taxi services have been banned after
lobbying by traditional taxi firms. The danger is that

: 30 although some rules need to be updated to protect

‘ consumers from harm, incumbents will try to destroy
competition. People who rent out rooms should pay tax,
of course, but they should not be regulated like a Ritz-
Carlton hotel. The lighter rules that typically govern

35 bed-and-breakfasts are more than adequate. The sharing
economy is the latest example of the internet’s value to

consumers. This emerging model is now big and
disruptive enough for regulators and companies to have
woken up to it. That is a sign of its immense potential. It

40 is time to start caring about sharing.

SIU MRR RC nesrenetea nea

f Before we start working carefully through the answers, we can eliminate D). A quick glance
at the passage reveals that the word I does not appear anywhere, so the passage cannot be
“personal,”

The next thing we want to do is simplify the question and the answers. The question asks
about the entire first paragraph - that’s 23 lines. Remember, however, that a long line
reference usually indicates that it is not necessary to reread the entire section carefully. So
instead, we're going to focus on the beginning of the passage, say lines 1-7. The beginning of
the correct answer must describe what's happening in those lines.

261

--- PAGE 261 ---
Which choice best describes the structure of the
| first paragraph (lines 1-23)?

The sharing economy is a little like online
shopping, which started in America [5 years ago. At
first, people were worried about security. But having
made a successful purchase from, say, Amazon, they

5 felt safe buying elsewhere. Similarly, using Airbnb or

. 7 gs A) A comparison is presented and developed
a car-hire service for the first time encourages people to | a
. through supporting examples.
try other offerings.

| B) A principle is described, and an opposing

i principle is then introduced.

C) The strengths and weaknesses of several
competing explanations are discussed.

D) A personal account of an experience is

| provided, followed by a reflection on that

i experience.

What is happening at the beginning of the passage? Well, the first sentence presents a
comparison, as indicated by the phrase a little like. If we focus on just the start of each answer
choice, we can see that A) is the only option that begins with the word comparison,
suggesting that it is correct. When we read a little further, we can see that the following lines
do in fact develop that comparison, as indicated by the transition similarly. A) is thus correct.

The answer choices could, however, be written in a manner less conducive to this type of
shortcut, What if they were presented like this?

Which choice best describes the structure of the
first paragraph (lines 1-23)?

The sharing economy is a little like online
shopping, which started in America 15 years ago. At
first, people were worried about security. But having
made a successful purchase from, say, Amazon, they
5 felt safe buying elsewhere. Similarly, using Airbnb or

a car-hire service for the first time encourages people to
try other offerings. Next, consider eBay. Having started
out as a peer-to-peer marketplace, it is now dominated
by professional “power sellers” (many of whom started

10 out as ordinary eBay users). The same may happen with
the sharing economy, which also provides new
opportunities for enterprise.

A) An assertion is presented, and supporting
examples are provided,

B) A principle is described, and an opposing
principle is then introduced.

C) The strengths and weaknesses of several
competing explanations are discussed.

D) A personal account of an experience is
presented, followed by a reflection on that
experience.

Although we can no longer use the word “comparison” in A) as a shortcut we can still get
important information by focusing on pronouns and transitions. The word I does not appear,
so D) can be eliminated right away. An “opposing principle” or “competing explanations”
would almost certainly be signaled by contradictors such as but or however, but no such
transitions appear here, eliminating B).

Again, that leaves A). In addition to expressing a comparison, the first sentence also conveys
an argument, i.e,, an assertion. And when we look at the transitions, we can see that they are

mostly continuers that introduce information supporting that assertion.

Now let's look at a full-length example.

262

--- PAGE 262 ---
:

ite ited rind ete

MONEE RS SMITE EAN IIB NE OPN IG AR FiO MM NEN,

panei binwels det

SevOirentee uot amen we

The following passage is adapted from Michael Anft,
“Solving the Mystery of Death Valley's Walking Rocks,”
© 2011 by Johns Hopkins Magazine.

For six decades, observers have been confounded
by the movement of large rocks across a dry lake bed
in California’s Death Valley National Park. Leaving
flat trails behind them, rocks that weigh up to 100

5 pounds seemingly do Michael Jackson’s moonwalk
across the valley’s sere, cracked surface, sometimes
traveling more than 100 yards. Without a body of water
to pick them up and move them, the rocks at Racetrack
Playa, a flat space between the valley’s high cliffs,

10 have been the subject of much speculation, including
whether they have been relocated by human pranksters
or space aliens. The rocks have become the desert
equivalent of Midwestern crop circles. “They really are
a curiosity,” says Ralph Lorenz, a planetary scientist at

15 the Applied Physics Laboratory. “Some [people] have
mentioned UFOs. But I’ve always believed that this is
something science could solve.”

It has tried. One theory holds that the rocks are
blown along by powerful winds. Another posits that

20 the wind pushes thin sheets of ice, created when the
desert’s temperatures dip low enough to freeze water
from a rare rainstorm, and the rocks go along for the
ride, But neither theory is rock solid. Winds at the playa
aren’t strong enough—some scientists believe that

25 they’d have to be 100 miles per hour or more—to blow
the rocks across the valley. And rocks subject to the
“ice sailing theory” wouldn’t create trails as they
moved.

Lorenz and a team of investigators believe that a

30 combination of forces may work to rearrange
Racetrack Playa’s rocks. “We saw that it would take a
lot of wind to move these rocks, which are larger than
you’d expect wind to move,” Lorenz explains. “That
led us to this idea that ice might be picking up the

35 rocks and floating them.” As they explained in the
January issue of The American Journal of Physics,
instead of moving along with wind-driven sheets of
ice, the rocks may instead be lifted by the ice, making
them more subject to the wind’s force. The key, Lorenz

40 says, is that the lifting by an “ice collar” reduces
friction with the ground, to the point that the wind now
has enough force to move the rock, The rock moves,
the ice doesn’t, and because part of the rock juts
through the ice, it marks the territory it has covered.

45 Lorenz’s team came to its conclusion through a
combination of intuition, lab work, and observation —
not that the last part was easy. Watching the rocks
travel is a bit like witnessing the rusting of a hubcap.
Instances of movement are rare and last for only a few

A
j
Fi
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i

263

50 seconds. Lorenz’s team placed low-resolution cameras
on the cliffs (which are about 30 miles from the nearest
paved road) to take pictures once per hour. For the past
three winters, the researchers have weathered extreme
temperatures and several flat tires to measure how

55 often the thermometer dips below freezing, how often
the playa gets rain and floods, and the strength of the
winds. “The measurements seem to back up our
hypothesis,” he says. “Any of the theories may be true
at any one time, but ice rafting may be the best explan-

60 ation for the trails we’ve been seeing. We’ ve seen trails
like this documented in Arctic coastal areas, and the
mechanism is somewhat similar. A belt of ice sur-
rounds a boulder during high tide, picks it up, and then
drops it elsewhere.” His “ice raft theory” was also

65 borne out by an experiment that used the ingenuity of a
high school science fair. Lorenz placed a basalt pebble
in a Tupperware container with water so that the
pebble projected just above the surface. He then turned
the container upside down in a baking tray filled with a

70 layer of coarse sand at its base, and put the whole thing
in his home freezer. The rock’s “keel” (its protruding
part) projected downward into the sand, which simu-
lated the cracked surface of the playa (which scientists
call “Special K” because of its resemblance to cereal

75 flakes). A gentle push or slight puff of air caused the
Tupperware container to move, just as an ice raft
would under the right conditions. The pebble made a
trail in the soft sand. “It was primitive but effective,”
Lorenz says of the experiment. Lorenz has spent the

80 last 20 years studying Titan, a moon of Saturn. He says
that Racetrack Playa’s surface mirrors that of a dried
lakebed on Titan. Observations and experiments on
Earth may yield clues to that moon’s geology. “We
also may get some idea of how climate affects

85 geology—particularly as the climate changes here on
Earth,” Lorenz says. “When we study other planets and
their moons, we’re forced to use Occam’s razor —
sometimes the simplest answer is best, which means
you look to Earth for some answers. Once you get out

90 there on Earth, you realize how strange so much of its
surface is. So, you have to figure there’s weird stuff to
be found on Titan as well.” Whether that’s true or not
will take much more investigation. He adds: “One day,
we'll figure all this out. For the moment, the moving

95 rock present a wonderful problem to study ina
beautiful place.”

--- PAGE 263 ---
Which choice best describes the structure of this
passage?

A)
B)
C)

D)

A theory is presented, and evidence to refute it
is provided.

A mystery is described, explanations are
considered, and a synthesis is proposed.

A hypothesis is introduced, and its strengths
and weaknesses are analyzed.

A new technology is described, its application
is discussed, and its implications are considered.

it’s understandable that you might get a little nervous (or more than a little nervous) about
having to boil 96 lines worth of information down into a single statement, but here again,
you can actually answer the question using only the first sentence.

What do we learn from it? That observers have been confounded (utterly baffled) by the
movement of the Racetrack Playa rocks - in other words, there’s a mystery going on. Based
on that piece of information alone, you can identify B) as the answer most likely to be
correct.

If you want to check the answer further, you can focus on the beginnings of subsequent
paragraphs. The words One theory and another [theory] at the beginning of the second
paragraph correspond to “explanations,” and the phrase a combination of forces corresponds
to “synthesis.” So B) is correct.

Counterarguments

One important component uf the “old idea/new” structure is the counterargument. Simply
put, a counterargument is an argument that weakens an idea - most often the “new idea” -
and that supports an opposing idea. It could represent a viewpoint held by real people, but it
could also describe objections that are hypothetical - ones that represent what someone
arguing the opposite point of view might say.

The following types of phrases are tipoffs that an author is introducing a counterargument:

* Some people/researchers have argued that...
* It might/could be argued that...

* A possible objection/ concern is that...

* On the other hand, one could argue that...

* Of course, itis true that...

Although it may seem contradictory to you, authors use counterarguments in order to
strerigthen their own claims. By addressing - and refuting or rebutting - possible objections,
they can explain why those objections do not outweigh their own argument and thus
demonstrate that their own argument is stronger than the other side’s.

264

--- PAGE 264 ---
Some counterarguments will appear near the beginning of a passage - remember that
authors often begin with “old ideas” - but they can also show up closer to the end. Having
finished explaining their argument, authors will sometimes then turn to potential objections.

It is important to understand that counterarguments will sometimes be presented in indirect
ways. Instead of asserting that anyone who disagrees with them is wrong, authors may
make concessions, acknowledging that some of the objections to their argument are valid.
They may also agree with part of the objection while disagreeing with other parts. In such
i cases, you must read very carefully to determine which idea the author agrees/ disagrees
with, In the following passage, the counterargument is in bold, and the rebuttal is italicized.

The sharing economy is a little like online
shopping, which started in America 15 years ago. At
first, people were worried about security. But having
made a successful purchase from, say, Amazon, they
5 felt safe buying elsewhere. Similarly, using Airbnb or
a car-hire service for the first time encourages people to
try other offerings. Next, consider eBay. Having started
out as a peer-to-peer marketplace, it is now dominated
by professional ‘power sellers” (many of whom started
10 out as ordinary eBay users). The same may happen with
the sharing economy, which also provides new
opportunities for enterprise. Some people have bought
cars solely to rent them out, for example. Incumbents
are getting involved too. Avis, a car-hire firm, has a share
15 ina sharing rival. So do GM and Daimler, two carmakers.
In the future, companies may develop hybrid models,
listing excess capacity (whether vehicles, equipment or
office space) on peer-to-peer rental sites. In the past,
new ways of doing things online have not displaced the
20 old ways entirely. But they have often changed them.
: Just as internet shopping forced Walmart and Tesco to
‘ adapt, so online sharing will shake up transport, tourism,
i equipment-hire and more.
The main worry is regulatory uncertainty. Will
25 room-4-renters be subject to hotel taxes, for example?
In Amsterdam officials are using Airbnb listings to
track down unlicensed hotels. In some American cities,
peer-to-peer taxi services have been banned after
lobbying by traditional taxi firms. The danger is that
30 although some rules need to be updated to protect
consumers from harm, incumbents will try to destroy
competition. People who rent out rooms should pay tax, |
of course, but they should not be regulated like a Ritz- i
Carlton hotel. The lighter rules that typically govern ;
35 bed-and-breakfasts are more than adequate. The sharing
economy is the latest example of the internet’s value to
consumers, This emerging model is now big and
disruptive enough for regulators and companies to have
woken up to it. That is a sign of its immense potential. It
40 is time to start caring about sharing.

a chcSIP RG hen Fal SA a

i
g
}
i
4
2
i
y

5
g
i
é
x
i
}
é
it
i

|

i
i

265

NN EIEN IE SON te

AR ATOR IE eh he ANE

--- PAGE 265 ---
This passage contains an excellent example of a counterargument that is presented
somewhat subtly. The author introduces a potential drawback (the main worry, regulatory
uncertainty), poses a rhetorical question (Will roomi-4-renters be subject to hotel taxes, for
exanple?), and then provides examples of how different places (Amsterdam, sone Aiuerican
cities) have responded in different ways, Finally, he states his opinion: although some
regulation is necessary to protect consumers, it must not stifle competition. The sharing
economy is too big to go back now.

Notice that the parts of the counterargument are separated from one another. First, the
author presents the counterargument, and only after he is done expanding on it does he
respond with his own assertion. He does not flip between viewpoints; once he has discussed
an idea, he leaves it and moves on.

Sometimes, however, authors may weave elements of the counterargument into their own
arguments, flipping back and forth within the same section or even within the same
sentence. The presence of contradictors such as although, while, and whereas often signals this
structure. When this is the case, the information that follows the contradictor will
correspond to the “new idea.”

In the passage below, for instance, the author repeatedly alternates between opposing
viewpoints within sentences or pairs of sentences. Again, the counterarguments are in bold,
whereas the author's arguments are italicized.

The world is complex and interconnected, and the
evolution of our communications system from a
broadcast model to a networked one has added a new
dimension to the mix. The Internet has made us all less

5 dependent on professional journalists and editors for

information about the wider world, allowing us to seek
out information directly via online search or to receive
it from friends through social media. But this enhanced
convenience comes with a considerable risk: that we

10 will be exposed to what we want to know at the expense

i5

of what we need to know, While we can find virtual
communities that correspond to our every curiosity,
there’s little pushing us beyond our comfort zones

to or into the unknown, even if the unknown inay have
serious implications for our lives. There are things we
should probably know more about—like political and
religious conflicts in Russia or basic geography. But even
if we knew more than we do, there’s no guarantee that
the knowledge gained would prompt us to act ina

20 particularly admirable fashion.

Here, the author develops his counterargument primarily by considering one of the main
downsides of the Internet: namely, that people do not pay attention to important
information about the world because they are intensely focused on their own interests and
have little incentive to move beyond their comfort zones.

266

--- PAGE 266 ---
naptecie itm eee amen teer RAS

SERRE AEN eyp
x tp

|
i

Effect of a Rhetorical Strategy

The final type of rhetorical strategy question asks you to identify the effect of a particular
rhetorical strategy, such as repetition or word choice. Although these questions are phrased.
differently, they are more or less identical to certain function or main point questions - they
are essentially asking you why information is presented in a particular way (i.e., its purpose)

or what point it is used to support.

For example, let’s return to this excerpt from Barbara Jordan’s 1976 speech:

...And now we must look to the future. Let us heed the |
voice of the people and recognize their common sense.
If we do not, we not only blaspheme our political
heritage, we ignore the common ties that bind all
30 Americans. Many fear the future. Many are distrustful
of their leaders, and believe that their voices are never
heard. Many seek only to satisfy their private interests.
But this is the great danger America faces ~ that we will
cease to be one nation and become instead a collection
35 of interest groups: city against suburb, region against
region, individual against individual; each seeking to
satisfy private wants. If that happens, who then will speak
for America? Who then will speak for the common good?
This is the question which must be answered in 1976: |
40 Ate we to be one people bound together by common
spirit, sharing in a common endeavor; or will we become
a divided nation? For all of its uncertainty, we cannot
flee the future. We must address and master the future
together. It can be done if we restore the belief that we
45 share a sense of national community, that we share a
common national endeavor.

What is the effect of the repetition of the word
“we” in the fifth paragraph (lines 39-46)?

A)
B)
C)

D)

It evokes a sense of danger, calling attention
to the dangers posed by political corruption.

It creates a sense of unity, emphasizing the
connection between the author and the reader.
It reveals a need for sociability, pointing out
the risks of excessive solitude.

It underscores the longstanding nature of a
problem faced by citizens in the United States.

Although there is a lot of information packed into the answer choices, the question is much
simpler than it appears. In fact, it’s almost unnecessary to even look at the passage.

There is one main reason that authors choose to write in the first person plural (we): to create
a sense of solidarity, i.e., unity. This stylistic choice implies that a particular situation applies
to everyone and that the author is as involved as the reader. With that information, you can

immediately identify B) as the correct answer.

267

--- PAGE 267 ---
1,

10

15

20

25

30

Rhetorical Strategy Exercises

These are stimulating times for anyone interested
in questions of animal consciousness, On what seems
like a monthly basis, scientific teams announce the
results of new experiments, adding to a preponderance
of evidence that we’ve been underestimating animal
minds, even those of us who have rated them fairly
highly. New animal behaviors and capacities are
observed in the wild, often involving tool use—or at
least object manipulation—the very kinds of activity
that led the distinguished zoologist Donald R. Griffin to
found the field of cognitive ethology (animal thinking)
in 1978: octopuses piling stones in front of their
hideyholes, to name one recent example; or dolphins
fitting marine sponges to their beaks in order to dig for
food on the seabed; or wasps using small stones to
smooth the sand around their egg chambers, concealing
them from predators. At the same time neurobiologists
have been finding that the physical structures in our
own brains most commonly held responsible for
consciousness are not as rare in the animal kingdom as
had been assumed. Indeed they are common, All of this
work and discovery appeared to reach a kind of
crescendo last summer, when an international group of
prominent neuroscientists meeting at the University of
Cambridge issued “The Cambridge Declaration on
Consciousness in Non-Human Animals,” a document
stating that “humans are not unique in possessing the
neurological substrates that generate consciousness.”
It goes further to conclude that numerous documented
animal behaviors must be considered “consistent with
experienced feeling states.”

268

Which choice best describes the organization of
this passage?

A) A theory is offered, an experiment is presented,
and a critique is offered.

B) An existing model is discussed, its flaws are
examined, and a new model is proposed.

C) Several examples of animal behavior are
presented, and their significance is analyzed,

D) Anassertion is made, and specific examples
are provided to support it.

In line 21, the author’s focus shifts from

A) aseries of examples to a description of an
outcome,

B) focus on an individual to a consideration of

a group.

an examination of a problem to a proposal of

a solution.

a discussion of a claim to a questioning of

that claim.

C)

D)

--- PAGE 268 ---
i
i
ss
}
A
i
i
g
Hl

NBT yoo aie

SAO ps MONT Sieger:

F
3
i
2

oe

Readies IRANIANS i tery aig OE ARR 6g 0

9 top SOARING

A AIH Rr ay

At VOOR NEN BAA ps AOE

or ere nated See Maa

10

15

20

The following passage is adapted from Jane Austen,
Northanger Abbey, originally published in 1817,

No one who had ever seen Catherine Morland in
her infancy would have supposed her born to be an
heroine. Her situation in life, the character of her father
and mother, her own person and disposition, were all
equally against her,

Her father was a clergyman, without being
neglected, or poor, and a very respectable man, though
his name was Richard —and he had never been
handsome. He had a considerable independence besides
two good livings—and he was not in the least addicted
to locking up his daughters. Her mother was a woman
of useful plain sense, with a good temper, and, what is
more remarkable, with a good constitution. She had
three sons before Catherine was born; and instead of
dying in bringing the latter into the world, as anybody
might expect, she still lived on—lived to have six
children more—to see them growing up around her,
and to enjoy excellent health herself. A family of ten
children will be always called a fine family, where there
are heads and arms and legs enough for the number;
but the Morlands had little other right to the word, for
they were in general very plain, and Catherine, for
many years of her life, as plain as any. She had a thin
awkward figure, a sallow skin without colour, dark lank

25 hair, and strong features—so much for her person; and

30

35

40

45

not less unpropitious for heroism seemed her mind.

She was fond of all boy’s plays, and greatly preferred
cricket not merely to dolls, but to the more heroic
enjoyments of infancy, nursing a dormouse, feeding a
canary-bird, or watering a rose-bush. Indeed she had

no taste for a garden; and if she gathered flowers at

all, it was chiefly for the pleasure of mischief —

at least so it was conjectured from her always

preferring those which she was forbidden to take.

Such were her propensities—her abilities were quite as
extraordinary. She never could learn or understand
anything before she was taught; and sometimes not

even then, for she was often inattentive, and occasionally
stupid. Her mother was three months in teaching her
only to repeat the “Beggar’s Petition”; and after all, her
next sister, Sally, could say it better than she did.

Not that Catherine was always stupid —by no means;

she learnt the fable of “The Hare and Many Friends” as
quickly as any girl in England. Her mother wished her
to learn music; and Catherine was sure she should like it,
for she was very fond of tinkling the keys of the old
forlorn spinner; so, at eight years old she began. She
learnt a year, and could not bear it; and Mrs. Morland,
who did not insist on her daughters being accomplished in

269

50 spite of incapacity or distaste, allowed her to leave
off. The day which dismissed the musi¢c-master was
one of the happiest of Catherine's life. Her taste for
drawing was not superior; though whenever she could
obtain the outside of a letter from her mother or seize

55 upon any other odd piece of paper, she did what she
could in that way, by drawing houses and trees, hens
and chickens, all very much like one another. Writing
and accounts she was taught by her father; French
by her mother: her proficiency in either was not

60 remarkable, and she shirked her lessons in both
whenever she could. What a strange, unaccountable
character! for with all these symptoms of profligacy
at ten years old, she had neither a bad heart nor a bad
temper, was seldom stubborn, scarcely ever

65 quarrelsome, and very kind to the little ones, with
few interruptions of tyranny; she was moreover noisy
and wild, hated confinement and cleanliness, and loved
nothing so well in the world as rolling down the green
slope at the back of the house.

This passage is written from the perspective of

A) amember of Catherine’s family who is
critical of Catherine’s upbringing.

B) an observer familiar with Catherine and her
family.

C) acharacter who finds herself at odds with
her family.

D) acharacter who is puzzled by the constraints
placed on her by society.

The words “never,

39 66

not even,” and “inattentive”
(lines 36-38) mainly have the effect of

A) rebuking Catherine’s mother for her excessive
demands on her daughter.

B) pointing out Catherine’s contrary nature.

C) calling attention to Catherine’s lack of
precociousness.

D) provoking a sense of sympathy for Catherine’s
misbehavior.

--- PAGE 269 ---
On

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

This passage is adapted from Barry Schwartz, “More
Isn't Always Better,” © 2006 by Harvard Business
Review,

Marketers assume that the more choices they offer,
the more likely customers will be able to find just the
right thing. They assume, for instance, that offering 50
styles of jeans instead of two increases the chances that
shoppers will find a pair they really like. Nevertheless,
research now shows that there can be too much choice;
when there is, consumers are less likely to buy anything
at all, and if they do buy, they are less satisfied with
their selection.

It all began with jam. In 2000, psychologists Sheena

Iyengar and Mark Lepper published a remarkable study.

On one day, shoppers at an upscale food market saw a
display table with 24 varieties of gourmet jam. Those

who sampled the spreads received a coupon for $1 off
any jam. On another day, shoppers saw a similar table,

except that only six varieties of the jam were on display.

The large display attracted more interest than the small
one. But when the time came to purchase, people who
saw the large display were one-tenth as likely to buy as
people who saw the small display.

Other studies have confirmed this result that more
choice is not always better, As the variety of snacks,
soft drinks, and beers offered at convenience stores
increases, for instance, sales volume and customer
satisfaction decrease. Moreover, as the number of
retirement investment options available to employees
increases, the chance that they will choose any
decreases. These studies and others have shown not
only that excessive choice can produce “choice
paralysis,” but also that it can reduce people’s
satisfaction with their decisions, even if they made
good ones. My colleagues and I have found that
increased choice decreases satisfaction with matters as
trivial as ice cream flavors and as significant as jobs.

These results challenge what we think we know °
about human nature and the determinants of well-being.
Both psychology and business have operated on the
assumption that the relationship between choice and
well-being is straightforward: The more choices people
have, the better off they are. In psychology, the benefits
of choice have been tied to autonomy and control. In
business, the benefits of choice have been tied to the
benefits of free markets more generally. Added options
make no one worse off, and they are bound to make
someone better off.

Choice is good for us, but its relationship to
satisfaction appears to be more complicated than we

270

50

55

60

65

70

75

had assumed. There is diminishing marginal utility in
having alternatives; each new option subtracts a little
from the feeling of well-being, until] the marginal
benefits of added choice level off. What’s more,
psychologists and business academics alike have
largely ignored another outcome of choice: More of it
requires increased time and effort and can lead to
anxiety, regret, excessively high expectations, and
self-blame if the choices don’t work out. When the
number of available options is small, these costs

are negligible, but the costs grow with the number of
options. Eventually, each new option makes us feel
worse off than we did before.

Without a doubt, having more options enables us,
most of the time, to achieve better objective outcomes.
Again, having 50 styles of jeans as opposed to two
increases the likelihood that customers will find a pair
that fits. But the subjective outcome may be that
shoppers will feel overwhelmed and dissatisfied. This
dissociation between objective and subjective results
creates a significant challenge for retailers and
marketers that look to choice as a way to enhance the
perceived value of their goods and services.

Choice can no longer be used to justify a marketing
strategy in and of itself. More isn’t always better,
either for the customer or for the retailer.

Discovering how much assortment is warranted is a
considerable empirical challenge. But companies that
get the balance right will be amply rewarded.

This passage is written from the perspective of
A) an interested observer who believes that
customers should be offered as many choices
as possible.

a person who is knowledgeable about economic
theory but who lacks practical experience.

a researcher actively engaged in studying

the effects of choice on consumer behavior.

B)
C)

D) a marketing expert who wants to advertise

products more effectively.

--- PAGE 270 ---
i
:
:
&

son ne Ot

AP AAA NNR oe bttscorTeOn ne he

Riniaateawigtengt ony ane

&
t

t
2
a
g

Winger alana

Baw PARAS doce NaCI eer OM

Which of the following best describes the
organization of the first two paragraphs
(lines 1-20)?

A) Acclaim is presented, an opposing claim is
offered, and evidence is provided.

B) An unexpected finding is described, and an
attempt to dismiss the finding is made.

C) A hypothesis is proposed, an experiment is
carried out, and the results are analyzed.

D) Competing explanations for a phenomenon
are discussed, and the results of a study
designed to test them are evaluated.

271

--- PAGE 271 ---
4,

10

i5

20

25

30

35

40

The following passage is adapted from Olympe de
Gouges, Declaration of the Rights of Women. It was
initially published in 1791, during the French Revolution,
and was written in response to the Declaration of the
Rights of Man (1789),

Woman, wake up; the toxin of reason is being
heard throughout the whole universe; discover your
rights. The powerful empire of nature is no longer
surrounded by prejudice, fanaticism, superstition, and
lies. The flame of truth has dispersed ail the clouds of
folly and usurpation. Enslaved man has multiplied his
strength and needs recourse to yours to break his chains.
Having become free, he has become unjust to his
companion. Oh, women, women! When will you cease
to be blind? What advantage have you received from
the Revolution? A more pronounced scorn, a more
marked disdain. In the centuries of corruption you ruled
only over the weakness of men. The reclamation of
your patrimony, based on the wise decrees of nature —
what have you to dread from such a fine undertaking?
Do you fear that our legislators, correctors of that
morality, long ensnared by political practices now out
of date, will only say again to you: women, what is
there in common between you and us? Everything, you
will have to answer. If they persist in their weakness in
putting this hypocrisy in contradiction to their
principles, courageously oppose the force of reason to
the empty pretensions of superiority, unite yourselves
beneath the standards of philosophy; deploy all the
energy of your character. Regardless of what barriers
confront you, it is in your power to free yourselves; you
have only to want to. Let us pass not to the shocking
tableau of what you have been in society; and since
national education is in question at this moment, let us
see whether our wise legislators will think judiciously
about the education of women.

Women have done more harm than good. Constraint
and dissimulation have been their lot. What force has
robbed them of, ruse returned to them; they had recourse
to all the resources of their charms, and the most
irreproachable persons did not resist them. Poison and
the sword were both subject to them; they commanded
in crime as in fortune. The French government, especially,
depended throughout the centuries on the nocturnal
administrations of women; the cabinet could keep no
secrets as a resuit of their indiscretions; all have been
subject to the cupidity and ambition of this sex,
formerly contemptible and respected, and since the
revolution, respectable and scorned.

272

45 In this sort of contradictory situation, what remarks

could I not make! I have but a moment to make them,

but this moment will fix the attention of the remotest

posterity. Under the Old Regime, all was vicious,

all was guilty; but could not the amelioration of

50 conditions be perceived even in the substance of
vices? A woman only had to be beautiful or amiable;
when she possessed these two advantages, she saw a
hundred fortunes at her feet. If she did not profit from
them, she had a bizarre character or a rare philosophy

55 which made her scorn wealth; then she was deemed
to be like a crazy woman. A young, inexperienced
woman, seduced by a man whom she loves, will
abandon her parents to follow him; the ingrate will
leave her after a few years, and the older she has

60 become with him, the more inhuman is his
inconstancy; if she has children, he will likewise
abandon them. If he is rich, he will consider himself
excused from sharing his fortune with bis noble victims.
Hf some involvement binds him to his duties, he will

65 deny them, trusting that the laws will support him,
Hf he is married, any other obligation loses its rights.
Then what laws remain lo extirpate vice all the way to
its root? The law of dividing wealth and public
administration between men and women. It can easily

70 be seen that one who is born into a rich family gains
very much from such equal sharing. But the one born
into a poor family with merit and virtue — what is her
lot? Poverty and opprobrium. If she does not precisely
excel in music or painting, she cannot be admitted to

75 any public function when she has all the capacity for it.

Which of the following best characterizes the
narrator’s shift in focus in lines 45-46?
A) She shifts from criticizing a group of people
to praising that group.
B) She shifts from discussing political affairs
to discussing artistic affairs.
She shifts from discussing opposing views to
attempting to reconcile those views.
She shifts from describing a problem to
offering a personal opinion,

C)

D)

--- PAGE 272 ---
scien gem atateiga tant

Cab SERS ZN RDNA SAINT EES ESSIEN INPLIN CEDAR ero

“PECADO emt aM EEE SEL

i
:
i

The following passage is adapted from “Scientists
Discover Salty Aquifer, Previously Unknown Microbial
Habitat Under Antarctica,” © 2015 by Dartmouth College.

Using an airborne imaging system for the first time
in Antarctica, scientists have discovered a vast network
of unfrozen salty groundwater that may support previously
unknown microbial life deep under the coldest, driest
desert on our planet. The findings shed new light on
ancient climate change on Earth and provide strong
evidence that a similar briny aquifer could support
microscopic life on Mars. The scientists used SkyTEM,
an airborne electromagnetic sensor, to detect and map

10 otherwise inaccessible subterranean features.

45

20

25

30

35

40

The system uses an antennae suspended beneath
a helicopter to create a magnetic field that reveals the
subsurface to a depth of about | ,000 feet. Because a
helicopter was used, large areas of rugged terrain could
be surveyed. The SkyTEM team was funded by the
National Science Foundation and led by researchers
from the University of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK), and
Dartmouth College, which oversees the NSF’s SkyTEM
project.

“These unfrozen materials appear to be relics of
past surface ecosystems and our findings provide
compelling evidence that they now provide deep
subsurface habitats for microbial life despite extreme
environmental conditions,” says lead author Jill Mikucki,
an assistant professor at UTK. “These new below-
ground visualization technologies can also provide insight
on glacial dynamics and how Antarctica responds to
climate change.”

Co-author Dartmouth Professor Ross Virginia is
SkyTEM’s co-principal investigator and director of
Dartmouth's Institute of Arctic Studies. “This project is
studying the past and present climate to, in part,
understand how climate change in the future will affect
biodiversity and ecosystem processes,” Virginia says.
“This fantastic new view beneath the surface will help
us sort out competing ideas about how the McMurdo
Dry Vaileys have changed with time and how this history
influences what we see today.”

The researchers found that the unfrozen brines form
extensive, interconnected aquifers deep beneath glaciers
and lakes and within permanently frozen soils. The
brines extend from the coast to at least 7.5 miles inland
in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, the largest ice-free region
in Antarctica, The brines could be due to freezing and/or

45 deposits. The findings show for the first time that the

Dry Valleys’ lakes are interconnected rather than isolated;
connectivity between lakes and aquifers is important in
sustaining ecosystems through drastic climate change,
such as lake dry-down events. The findings also challenge

273

i

50 the assumption that parts of the ice sheets below the
pressure melting point are devoid of liquid water.

In addition to providing answers about the biological
adaptations of previously unknown ecosystems that
persist in the extreme cold and dark of the Antarctic

55 winter, the new study could help scientists to
understand whether similar conditions might exist
elsewhere in the solar system, specifically beneath the
surface of Mars, which has many similarities to the
Dry Valleys. Overall, the Dry Valleys ecosystem —

60 cold, vegetation-free and home only to microscopic
animal and plant life — resembles, during the Antarctic
summer, conditions on the surface on Mars.

SkyTEM produced images of Taylor Valley along
the Ross Sea that suggest briny sediments exist at

65 subsurface temperatures down to perhaps -68°F,
which is considered suitable for microbial life. One of
the studied areas was lower Taylor Glacier, where the
data suggest ancient brine still exists beneath the
glacier. That conclusion is supported by the presence

70 of Blood Falls, an iron-rich brine that seeps out of the
glacier and hosts an active microbial ecosystem.

Scientists’ understanding of Antarctica's
underground environment is changing dramatically as
research reveals that subglacial lakes are widespread

75 and that at least half of the areas covered by the ice
sheet are akin to wetlands on other continents. But
groundwater in the ice-free regions and along the
coastal margins remains poorly understood.

Which choice best describes the organization of
this passage?

A) Anexperiment is discussed, and several
interpretations of its results are analyzed,

B) A finding is described, and the implications of
that finding are considered.

C) A hypothesis is presented, an attempt to
validate it using new technology is described,
and the resulting data are evaluated.

D) An ecosystem on Earth is compared to an
an ecosystem on Mars, and the origin of each
is discussed.

--- PAGE 273 ---
Explanations: Rhetorical Strategy Exercises

1.1D

Don’t get distracted by the lengthy answer choices. In reality, all you need is the first sentence of
the passage: These are stinuuilating times for anyone interested in questions of animal consciousness. That
is a subjective statement, i.e., an assertion. That points right to D). The rest of the passage consists
of details supporting the claim: first, the findings that animals exhibit sophisticated behaviors,
and then the description of the “Cambridge Declaration.”

1.24

What sort of information precedes line 21? A series of examples illustrating the idea that animals
are likely capable of conscious thought. What happens in line 21? The author begins to describe
the meeting of neuroscientists at Cambridge ~ the phrase All of this work and discovery appeared to
reach a kind of crescendo last summer indicates that the meeting was the result of the discoveries
described in the previous section of the passage. The shift from examples to result (~outcome)
corresponds to A).

2.1B

The passage is written from an objective, third-person point of view: Catherine and her family
members are referred to as she, he, and they. Furthermore, the narration is purely descriptive. The
narrator knows a lot about Catherine and her family but is not directly involved in the action.
That eliminates C) and D). Choosing between A) and B), you might run into trouble if you don’t
realize that the description of Catherine’s faults is ironic. The narrator is not actually criticizing
Catherine but rather poking fun at the convention of a too-good-to-be-true heroine. That
eliminates A). B) is correct because the narrator is simply an observer who is very familiar with
the lives of Catherine and her family.

22C

To simplify this question, rephrase it as, “what point are the words never, not even, and inattentive
used to make?” Essentially, they are intended to emphasize the fact that Catherine’s abilities
aren’t particularly extraordinary for a girl of her age. In other words, she lack precociousness
(exceptional maturity). That makes C) the answer.

3.1C

This question throws an awful lot of information at you, but in fact it can be answered very
quickly using only one tiny section of the passage. The use of the first person in the phrase My
colleagues and I indicates that the writer is personally involved (“actively engaged”) in the type of
research he describes. The answer is therefore C).

3.2A

To simplify this question, match the beginning of the passage to the beginning of an answer
choice. The repetition of the word assiume (lines 1 and 3), followed by the phrase Nevertheless,
research now shows indicates “old idea/new idea,” or claim and opposing claim. That corresponds
directly to A).

274

--- PAGE 274 ---
4.1D

The easiest way to answer this question is to recognize that the word I appears for the first time
in line 46, indicating a shift to a first-person (personal) point of view. That corresponds to D).

5.1B

The easiest way to answer this question is to match the beginning of the passage to the beginning
of an answer choice. The first sentence of the passage refers to the fact that scientists have
discovered something. Discovery = finding, making B) correct.

Sainte

Ree meee I at

:
$
e
3
a
k
i
i

eNsireReE Ase:

ven ac ct SESE NRCHit Er ARMNOMO REET RON RD WARMED aap AEE yy,
a

275

pee iranian ena elt ncoystrt EARN yn fO

ANIA OME TALS AOS EN

--- PAGE 275 ---
Paired Passages

Not surprisingly, paired passages are many people’s least favorite part of SAT Reading.
They often hit you just when you're starting to tire, and they demand a level of focus that
goes even beyond that required for the rest of the section. Moreover, they are often filled
with antiquated language and complex syntax, making literal comprehension a less
straightforward matter than it is on the rest of the Reading Test. Although there is no simple
way to make these passages and questions easy, breaking them down carefully can go a long
way toward making them more manageable.

If you are taking APUSH or another challenging U.S. History class that makes substantial
use of primary sources, this type of writing will probably be familiar to you. It is even
possible that you will encounter documents you've studied in class - or, if not the exact
documents, then very similar ones. If you are unaccustomed to reading old-fashioned prose,
however, these passages may represent a more significant challenge.

If you are a strong reader who handles this type of writing well, you can probably approach
paired passages much as you approach the other type of passages. If, however, you find
relationship questions consistently too confusing or time consuming, you should consider
skipping them entirely (filling in your favorite letter) in order to spend more time on the
questions that ask about each passage individually. Typically you will encounter only three
or four relationship questions per test, so skipping them does not represent a major sacrifice
of points. In fact, if you are not aiming for a very high score and struggle
disproportionately with these questions, you are probably better off using the time you
would have spent on them to answer other, more straightforward questions.

Alternately, you may want to skim through the relationship questions to see whether any of
them seem manageable. If you find one(s), you can do it/them and skip the others.

Or, if paired passages take you noticeably longer than the other passages but you are still
able to answer the questions given enough time, you can always plan to leave them for last,
regardless of where they appear. That way, you will not risk spending more time on a
smaller number of questions mid-way through the section, forcing yourself to rush through
a greater number of questions later on.

Regardless of what option you choose, if you find paired passages in any way problematic,
you should have a clear strategy for managing them before you walk into the test.

276

--- PAGE 276 ---
EB ethan ta LENE Stree

;
i
i
>
ra
‘
!
i
§
;
$
¥

x
/
:
;
&

REGRETS,

“Agent

RLS NINN AN PRON NAPS ORANGES IR So RE LLES ERE SI EON MEI

Overview of Paired Passages

The College Board refers to paired passages as “The Great Global Conversation,” but in
reality this title is somewhat exaggerated. Based on the exams released thus far, the
“conversation” consists primarily of excerpts from nineteenth-century American documents
presenting conflicting views on some aspect of equality or social/political rights - most
frequently involving the status of women and African Americans. An occasional European
writer might be thrown in for variety, as might a set of passages written in the late
eighteenth- or early twentieth century, but the majority of passage sets stay within a fairly
restricted set of time periods and themes.

Both passages will always discuss the same idea or event, and thus far they appear to
conform to a fairly predictable pattern: Passage 1 expresses the “anti-” argument or less
radical position (e.g., women should not be granted the same rights as men; people should
not violate unjust laws but rather work to change them) and is more negative in tone.
Passage 2, in contrast, typically celebrates inclusion and full equality for all groups, and is
more positive. The College Board shows a clear preference for ending on a good note.

While the relationship between the passages is typically the same from test to test, the way
in which the College Board asks about that relationship is not. Instead of asking you to
identify a “contrast” or “disagreement,” questions may instead use more abstract or
confusing language, requiring you to identify the “central tension” or “conflict” between the
passages. Do not let the phrasing fool you into thinking that you are being asked to do
something very complicated! Instead, stay focused on the fact that you are simply being
asked to recognize what major point the authors of the passages disagree about.

As you read, you should also make sure to note any major stylistic differences between the
passages. For example, is one written from a first-person perspective (I!) while the other is
written from an objective, third-person (he, she, if) stance? If so, then the first passage is by
definition more personal than the second, and the second one is by definition more
detached /neutral/ objective than the first ~ prime fodder for relationship questions.

All that said, you should keep in mind that these patterns may shift as the test evolves, and
not assume that the passages in the Official Guide are fully representative of what could
appear on future exams. It is possible, for example, that a handful of other, subtler
relationships (which regularly appeared on the old SAT) may become more relevant:

* Passage 1 and Passage 2 agree but have different (not necessarily opposing)
focuses or stylistic differences.

* Passage 1 and Passage 2 discuss different aspects of the same event or idea.
* Passage 2 provides an example of an idea described generally in Passage 1.

¢ Passage 2 provides an explanation for a phenomenon discussed in Passage 1.

Also: If you look through the Official Guide, you'll notice that the first test includes a science-
themed pair, whereas the other seven tests use historical documents. Although it seems
reasonable to assume that many future tests will include paired historical documents as weil,
it is also possible that other types of passages will be used. I am therefore including a science
example among the exercises for the sake of thoroughness.

277

--- PAGE 277 ---
Compared with Douglass’s view in Passage 1
of “America,” King’s view in Passage 2 of
“the American people” is more

A)
B)
C)
D)

objective.
despondent.
uplifting.
doubtful,

How to Read Paired Passages

As a general rule, your goal should be to deal with the smallest amount of information
possible at any given time. The more work you do in terms of determining arguments
upfront, the less work you'll need to do later. And when you break questions down and
work through them methodically, you greatly reduce the chance of confusion.

So ina nutshell:

1. Clearly mark the questions that ask about Passage 1 only; the ones that ask about
Passage 2 only; and the ones that ask about both passages.

2. Read Passage 1: write main point + tone

3, Answer Passage 1 questions

4. Read Passage 2: write main point + tone AND relationship to Passage 1
5. Answer Passage 2 questions

6. Answer Passage 1/ Passage 2 relationship questions

It is important to determine the relationship between the passages upfront because you will
always encounter questions that test your understanding of that relationship. Some of these
questions will be worded very directly (“Which choice best describes the relationship
between the passages?”), while others will be more roundabout, asking you to infer how the
author of one passage would most likely respond to a statement made in the other passage.

Either way, if you've already defined the topic and the relationship, you've essentially
answered some of these questions before you’ve even looked at them. If the authors of the
two passages disagree ~ which, as we've seen, they usually will - correct answers to
relationship questions will usually be negative. You can thus eliminate positive and neutral
options, which can often be identified from the first few words of the answer. Furthermore,
when answers include more detailed information about the passages, you may sometimes be
able to use the main points themselves. (For a good example, see Test 8, #39.)

If you choose to skip some of the questions, or you leave the paired passages for last and
start to run short on time, you can also use your knowledge of the test’s structure to help you
make educated guesses. For example, take a look at the following question. We don’t even
need a set of passages here ~ our only concern is how to use the framework of the test to
predict the most probable answer.

278

--- PAGE 278 ---
{
|
]
€
>
3
i
é

SNE eis cantante

SEINE Loc ga Westy

PAE IA RAO ONC NNEC BUN ORS

Fe kot ete Ey

3
:
§
é
:
NM
Ba

The key to predicting the most likely answer lies in the question, which asks what quality
Passage 2 has “more” of. Based on the most common pattern, you can assume that Passage 2
is more positive than Passage 1, and that the correct answer is positive as well,

B) and D) are negative, and A) is neutral, leaving C) as the only positive option. Note, by the
way, that it does not matter whether you know what despondent means as long as you can
recognize that uplifting fits. The prefix DE- also suggests that B) is negative.

To be very clear: If you are answering the questions for real, you can assume that there
will sometimes be exceptions to the usual pattern, and you should always go back to the
passage for confirmation. You can, however, save time by checking the most likely answer
first. For a question like the one above, you could work from the assumption that C) was
correct and then reread the appropriate lines to double-check. If you recognized that C) fit,
you could choose it and move on; if you didn’t, you could then consider the other answers.

You should also be aware that some questions will ask you to identify a statement with
which both authors would agree, even when the passages clearly convey conflicting
opinions. In such cases, you must proceed very carefully. Answers to these questions may
depend on an easily overlooked detail in one or both of the passages. Sometimes that detail
will be located in a key place (introduction, last sentence, a topic sentence, close to a major
transition or a dash/colon), but sometimes it will not. Because it is very unlikely that you
will remember the information necessary to answer the question, you should always plan to
return to the passages as necessary. You should also make sure not to eliminate any answer
you're uncertain about until you have confirmed that it is incorrect.

I repeat: Do not even attempt to rely on your memory. Just read.

Relationship Questions are Inference Questions

Because there is absolutely no difference between questions that ask about one passage in a
paired passage set, and questions that ask about single passages elsewhere on the test, there
is absolutely no difference in how you should approach questions that ask about Passage 1
or Passage 2 only.

For most students, the real challenge is the relationship questions, which ask you to infer
how one author would likely react to the other’s ideas. When you encounter these questions,
you must take the time to break them down, defining each idea separately and clearly before
attempting to determine the relationship between the two perspectives.

Relationship questions should be broken down in the following way:

1, Reread the lines in question and sum up the idea in your own words.
2. Reiterate the main point of the other passage.
3. Determine whether the authors would agree or disagree.

4. Look at the answers: if the authors would agree, eliminate all negative options; if the
authors would disagree, eliminate all positive options.

5. Check the remaining answers against the passage, focusing on the most specific part
of each answer.

279

--- PAGE 279 ---
It is extremely important that you take a moment and write or underline the main point of
each passage because if an answer to a Passage 1/Passage 2 relationship question restates
the main point of the appropriate passage, that answer will almost certainly be correct.

This guideline becomes exceedingly important when questions are phrased in a roundabout
or complex manner. As long as you know which passage is being asked about and what the
point of that passage is, you can probably find your way to the answer. For an excellent
example of how this applies to a real SAT question, see Test 7, #41: the question is phrased in
an exceptionally complicated way, but the correct answer, A), merely restates the point of
Passage 2 (which appears in the last sentence).

In addition, note that if you ever encounter an answer to a relationship question indicating
that one author would lack interest in the other author’s argument (e.g., apathetic, indifferent),
that answer will almost certainly be incorrect. Passages are chosen precisely because there is
a clear relationship between the authors’ ideas, so these words are inconsistent with the
framework of the test.

Beginning on the next page, we’re going to look at a sample set of passages along with some
questions.

280

--- PAGE 280 ---
¥
3
2
é
£
g

SHEMET ALA oto

La, EMR SINTON TREE ME ig

i
:

Passage 1 is adapted from J.B. Sanford, Argument Against
Senate Constitutional Amendment No. 8, Passage 2 is

adapted from Susan B. Anthony, Woman's Rights to the
Suffrage. Anthony delivered this speech in 1873, after being
arrested for voting in the 1872 presidential election.

Sanford was the Chairman of the 1911 California Democratic
Caucus,

Passage 1

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Suffrage is not a right. It is a privilege that may or
may not be granted. Politics is no place for a woman;
consequently the privilege should not be granted to her.

The mother’s influence is needed in the home. She
can do fittle good by gadding the streets and neglecting
her children. Let her teach her daughters that modesty,
patience, and gentleness are the charms of women...
The mothers of this country can shape the destinies of
the nation by keeping in their places and attending to
those duties that God Almighty intended for them. The
kindly, gentle influence of the mother in the home and
the dignified influence of the teacher in the school will
far outweigh all the influence of all the mannish female
politicians on earth.

Do women have to vote in order to receive the
protection of man? Why, men have gone to war,
endured every privation and death itself in defense of
woman. To man, woman is the dearest creature on
earth, and there is no extreme to which he would not go
for his mother or sister. By keeping woman in her
exalted position man can be induced to do more for her
than he could by having her mix up in affairs that will
cause him to lose respect and regard for her. Woman
does not have to vote to secure her rights. Man will go
to any extreme to protect and elevate her now. As long
as oman is woman and keeps her place she will get
more protection and more consideration than man gets.
When she abdicates her throne she throws down the
scepter of her power and loses her influence.

Woman is woman. She can not unsex herself or
change her sphere. Let her be content with her lot and
perform those high duties intended for her by the Great
Creator, and she will accomplish far more in
governmental affairs than she can ever accomplish by
mixing up in the dirty pool of politics. Keep the home
pure and all will be well with the Republic. Let not the
sanctity of the home be invaded by every little
politician that may be running up and down the
highway for office. Let the manly men and the
womanly women defeat this amendment and keep
woman where she belongs in order that she may retain
the respect of all mankind.

281

Passage 2

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

Friends and Fellow Citizens: I stand before you
tonight under indictment for the alleged crime of
having voted at the last presidential election, without
having a fawful right to vote. It shall be my work this
evening to prove to you that in thus voting, J not only
committed no crime, but, instead, simply exercised
my citizen’s rights, guaranteed to me and all United
States citizens by the National Constitution, beyond
the power of any State to deny.

The preamble of the Federal Constitution says:
“We, the people of the United States, in order to
form a more perfect union, establish justice, insure
domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense,
promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings
of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain
and establish this Constitution for the United States
of America...”

For any State to make sex a qualification that
must ever result in the disfranchisement of one
entire half of the people is therefore a violation of
the supreme law of the land. By it the blessings of
liberty are for ever withheld from women and their
female posterity. To them this government has no
just powers derived from the consent of the governed,
To them this government is not a democracy, It is not
a republic. It is an odious aristocracy; a hateful
oligarchy of sex; the most hateful aristocracy ever
established on the face of the globe...

It was we, the people; not we, the white male
cilizens; nor yet we, the male citizens; but we, the
whole people, who formed the Union. And we formed
it, not to give the blessings of liberty, but to secure
them; not to the half of ourselves and the half of our
posterity, but to the whole people — women as well as
men. And it is a downright mockery to talk to women
of their enjoyment of the blessings of liberty while
they are denied the use of the only means of securing
them provided by this democratic-republican
government— the ballot.

The only question left to be settled now is: Are
women persons? And I hardly believe any of our
opponents will have the hardihood to say they are not.
Being persons, then, women are citizens; and no State
has a right to make any law, or to enforce any old law,
that shall abridge their privileges or immunities.
Hence, every discrimination against women in the
constitutions and laws of the several States is today

90 null and void, precisely as in every one against

Negroes.

--- PAGE 281 ---
Which choice best states the relationship between
the two passages?

A)
B)
C)

D)

Passage 2 proposes an alternate explanation for
a phenomenon presented in Passage 1.

Passage 2 discredits the results of an
underiaking discussed in Passage 1].

Passage 2 considers the implications of a belief
alluded to in Passage 1.

Passage 2 denounces an idea that is defended
in Passage 1.

Let’s start by breaking things down:

Passage 1

Main point: women shouldn't vote
Tone: negative (condescending)

Passage 2

Main point: women should vote
Tone: positive (determined)

Relationship: Disagree

Notice that although both passages contain a fair amount of information, they do not contain
a lot of different ideas. Unlike science passages, which tend to detail the various stages of an
experiment, both passages here remain focused on supporting a single point. This is
important because it means that if you get the gist, you don’t have to struggle through every
last turn of phrase.

Luckily, Passage 1 gives you the point in the first three lines. The rest of the passage serves
only to elaborate on it. Passage 2 doesn’t directly state the point right away, but Anthony’s
first-paragraph discussion of her illegal decision to vote provides a pretty good clue about
where things are headed. Besides, you can pretty much infer what Passage 2 will be about
just from reading Passage 1: the College Board would never permit Sanford’s view to stand
unchallenged, and a response from a well-known suffragist (Anthony, Elizabeth Cady
Stanton, Carrie Chapman Catt, or Lucretia Mott) is the logical choice for Passage 2.

At the same time, however, you should notice that neither author's argument is entirely one-
dimensional. Instead, they are both positive and negative in turn. Sanford in Passage 1, for
example, is opposed to women acquiring the right to vote, but he is quite positive toward
women themselves, Phrases such as dearest creature on earth (lines 18-19) and exalted (lofty,
elevated) position (line 21) convey that attitude. Likewise, Anthony (Passage 2) clearly has a
positive attitude toward the Constitution, which promises full rights to all citizens, and a
negative attitude toward the fact that women are prohibited from exercising those rights.

All that considered, let’s start by looking at a straightforward relationship question:

282

--- PAGE 282 ---
g
z

i
‘

a Nea ONL

Pe aac

A FESR RHETT OST E

MERGE RFE RANE ERAALEL ELIE SEB

E
€
d
#
e
£
&
3
&
=

et pe suse spatneN RIS

sgeab tt

Which choice best states describes the way that
the two authors conceive of women’s proper
role in society?

A) Sanford believes that women’s role should

B)

C)

D)

dependent on their husbands, while Anthony

sources of income.

should focus on their own interests.

We know that the authors of the two passages disagree, so we can assume that the correct
answer will be negative. If we start by looking at the beginning of each answer choice, we
can see that only B) and D) are negative, suggesting that we should check them first.

“Discredits” is almost certainly too strong - 40 lines aren’t enough to discredit anything -
but “denounces” is a bit more moderate. And indeed, D) is consistent with the fact that
Anthony takes serious issue with the notion that women should be denied the full rights of
citizenship on the grounds of gender - an idea that the author of Passage 1 clearly defends.

Another type of relationship question essentially asks you to identify the main point of each
passage:

be confined to the domestic sphere, while
Anthony believes that women should participate
fully in public life.

Sanford believes that women should be

believes that women should seek their own

Sanford believes that women are emotionally
unsuited to holding office while Anthony
believes that they are superior politicians.
Sanford believes that women should place
the needs of their families above their own
desires, while Anthony believes that women

Don’t be put off by the fact that the answer choices give you so much information to wade
through. In reality, the question is much simpler than it appears.

What is the topic of both passages? Whether women should vote. That's it. There is no
mention of whether women should work outside the home, so B) can be eliminated. There is
also no discussion of whether women should place their own needs or those of their families
first, eliminating D).

Now, be careful with C). The passages do have a political theme, but there is no explicit
discussion of whether women should hold office, or of whether they are better politicians
than men. So C) can be eliminated as well.

That leaves A), which phrases the topic more abstractly (“public life’) but accurately
captures the contrast between the views in the two passages: Sanford thinks that women
should focus on home and family (“the domestic sphere”), whereas Anthony believes that
women should enjoy all of the rights of citizenship.

283

--- PAGE 283 ---
In comparison to the author of Passage 1, the author
of Passage 2 is more

A) doubtful.
B) decisive,
C) personal.
D) detached,

Anthony would most likely have reacted to
lines 25-29 (“As...influence”) of Passage 2 with

A) agreement, because she believes that women
can achieve equality in a variety of ways.
appreciation, because she believes that

and health could lead to new therapies.
disapproval, because she believes that political
rights are necessary for full participation in
society.

skepticism, because she believes that
differences between men and women have i
been exaggerated. i

B)

C)

D)

You could also be asked to identify a difference involving style or point of view. Such
questions do not appear frequently, but they are fair game for the test.

If you notice that the word I appears in Passage 2 but not Passage 1, you can jump to C). A
passage in the first person is by definition more personal than one in the third person.

Another way in which the SAT tests relationships between passages involves asking how the
author of one passage would likely respond to the author of the other passage. Every exam
typically includes at least one of these questions.

The shortest way to answer this question is to use the relationship between the passages. The
authors disagree very strongly, so the correct answer will almost certainly be negative. You
can skim the line reference for confirmation; then, look at only the first word of each answer.
Agreement and appreciation are both positive, so you can eliminate A) and B) right away.

Now, be careful with D). You might find it logical to assume that someone who holds such
strong views about equality would also think that differences between men and women
have been overblown. But Anthony never discusses that idea directly. Her focus is on the
rights that the Constitution ensures to women as people. She makes no mention of the
differences between men and women, or how large those differences are.

In contrast, C) pretty much sums up the main point of Passage 2: women are entitled to full
citizenship, and that includes the right to vote. So C) is correct.

284

--- PAGE 284 ---
Cie eee Sane SE AOS KM NS TIME IO TAS LIN.

Sanford in Passage | would most likely
characterize the position taken by Anthony in
lines 47-51 (“J not...deny”) in Passage 2 as

A

B

Cc

D

)

consistent with the Constitutional ideals of
liberty and equality. i

Otherwise, you can ignore the choices provided and answer the question on your own.
Although this may seem like a more time-consuming approach, it can actually save you time
by allowing you to jump to the correct answer and bypass any potential distractors.

1) Reread the lines in question and summarize them.

As long as woman is wontan and keeps her place she will get more protection and more consideration
than man gets. When she abdicates [steps down from] her throne she throws down the scepter of her
power and loses her influence. Basically, women can only have power by not having power.

2) Restate the point of the other passage. (In this case, Passage 2)

P2: Women are entitled to all of the rights of full citizens.

3) Determine what the author of the other passage would think.

It's pretty clear that the authors would disagree. Why? Because Anthony believes that
women must have the same political rights as men in order to truly be free - which is pretty
much what C) says. Working this way allows you bypass the temptation of D).

You will also encounter relationship questions whose answers are less obviously phrased in
terms of positive and negative. To be sure, you can still use this technique to eliminate
answers - you just have to read a bit more closely to do so.

overly ambitious in comparison fo the goals
of moderate suffragists.

incompatible with women’s natural role in
society.

a compelling example of the democratic
process in action.

Lines 47-50: I not only committed no crime, but, instead, simply exercised my citizen's rights,
guaranteed to me and all United States citizens by the National Constitution, beyond the power of
any State to deny.

That is a position that Sanford would clearly reject, so the answer must be negative.

Again, focus on the beginning of each answer. “Overly ambitious” and “incompatible” are
negative, so A) and B) both stay. “Compelling” and “consistent” are positive, so C) and D)
can be eliminated.

Upon closer inspection, A) can be crossed out as well because Sanford does not even

mention moderate suffragists. Based on Passage 1, he appears to be opposed to all
suffragists. That leaves B), which accurately states his position.

285

--- PAGE 285 ---
Sanford in Passage | would most likely
characterize the position taken by Anthony in
lines 47-51 (“I not...deny”) in Passage 2 as

A) overly ambitious in comparison to the goals
of moderate suffragists.

B) incompatible with women’s natural role in
society.

C) acompelling example of the democratic
process in action.

D) consistent with the Constitutional ideals of
liberty and equality.

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Lines 16-18 (“Why, men...woman”)
B) Lines 18-19 (“To man...earth”)

C) Lines 24-25 (“Man...now”

D) Lines 30-31 (“Woman...sphere”)

Paired Passages and Supporting Evidence Questions

Although you can assume that questions asking about only Passage 1 or Passage 2 will
sometimes be followed by supporting evidence questions, the appearance of these questions
in relation to paired passage relationship questions is unfortunately somewhat unclear. If you
look at the first four tests in the Official Guide, you'll notice that some questions asking about
the relationship between the two passages are followed by questions asking you to identify
the lines that support the previous question. In later (administered) tests, however, such
questions no longer appear. Given that, it seems unlikely you will encounter one when you
take the exam; however, I am including an example below for the sake of caution.

The question we just looked at on the previous page could, for example, be asked this way:

As we've seen, the most efficient way to solve supporting evidence pairs is often to plug the
answers to the second question into the first question and work from there. When
supporting evidence questions are coupled with paired passage relationship questions,
however, a bit more flexibility is required.

If you are able to answer the first question quickly using the main point, you should answer
the questions in order. Then, you can simply check each line reference in the second question
to see if it supports the correct idea,

If, on the other hand, the answer is based on a detail not directly related to the main point,

you may be better served by plugging the line references in the second question into the first
question.

286

--- PAGE 286 ---
i
:
é
‘
5
r
é

It’s fairly easy to answer Question #1 by using the main point of Passage 1: B) effectively
sums up Sanford’s argument. However, that information alone is unlikely to give you the
answer to Question #2 since pretty much all of Passage 1 is devoted to the idea that women
should not have the right to vote. As a result, you need to get a little more specific about
what you're looking for when you go to check the line references.

The answer to Question #1 actually provides an important clue when it refers to women’s
“natural” role in society. The correct set of lines in Passage 2 must therefore be consistent
with the belief that women’s subordinate status is innate.

One by one, we’re going to check the answers against that requirement.

A) Why, men have gone to war, endured every privation and death itself in defense of
woman.

No, this answer focuses on men instead of women. The fact that men have suffered to
defend women has nothing to do with the fact that Sanford views women’s secondary status
as “natural.”

B) To man, woman is the dearest creature on earth.

No, this focuses on men as well. It’s completely off-topic.

C) Man will go to any extreme to protect or elevate her now.

No, Same problem as A) and B).

D) Woman is woman. She can not unsex herself or change her sphere.

This works, The statement that woman can not unsex herself or change her sphere is consistent
with the idea that her position is fixed by nature itself.

So D) is the correct answer to Question #2.

287

--- PAGE 287 ---
A)
B)

C)

D)

Which idea is supported by the authors of both
passages?

Women are deserving of respect and esteem.
Men are responsible for ensuring women’s
protection.

The moral obligations of women are often
ignored.

It is inevitable that women will obtain the
same rights as men.

Agreement Questions

As mentioned earlier in this chapter, passages with conflicting viewpoints typically include a
question asking you to identify a point that the authors would agree on. These questions are
intended to test your understanding of the complexities of the relationship between the
passages - more specifically, the fact that an author can recognize the validity of part of an
argument while (strongly) disagreeing with almost everything else.

As a result, knowing the general relationship between the passages is not sufficient to
answer all of the questions. While the information necessary to answer an agreement
question may be located in a key place (intro, conclusion, after a major transition) in one or
both of the passages, it is also possible that the answer will hinge on information in the
middle of a paragraph.

Let’s look at an example, still using the “Sanford vs. Anthony” passage from p. 281.

If you're trying to answer the question using only the simplest main points, you might
eliminate D) immediately. After all, Sanford in Passage 1 believes that it is only natural for
women not to vote, and so he would undoubtedly reject the idea that there was anything
“inevitable” about women obtaining that right.

This, however, is where most people start to get lost and try to rely on their memories. If
you've only thought about the main point of Passage 1 in the simplest terms ~ that is,
“women shouldn’t vote” ~ then it’s entirely possible that none of the remaining answers
would look particularly appealing to you. There’s a reasonable chance you'd be able to
eliminate D), but then you might get thrown off and pick C) (the confusing answer) because
A) seemed too positive.

The problem is that Sanford, while clearly negative toward the idea of women voting, is just
as clearly positive toward women themselves. He makes it clear that they hold an exalted
position (line 21), and that men hold them in extremely high regard. So in fact, he would
agree with Anthony that women are deserving of respect and esteem, making the answer A),

288

--- PAGE 288 ---
ageing AE RNS aN te

oT ROOT RAN AAEM A

t
7
‘
z
3
i

The primary purpose of each passage is to

You could also be asked about the primary purpose of both passages:

A) distinguish between a natural right and

B) advance an argument about whether a particular

C) explain the role of a specific principle within

D) discuss the process by which rights and

t
|
i
i
an individual preference. i
i
. . * i
action should be considered a right. i

a democratic system.

privileges are determined.

You can treat this type of question much as you would any other function question. To avoid
getting distracted by the abstract language in the answer choices, keep your focus as
concrete and specific as possible.

To reiterate: what is the topic of the passages? Whether women should have the right to
vote. That's one right, singular.

On that basis, you can eliminate D) because it refers to rights and privileges, plural. It’s outside
the scope of the passage.

Now we're going to think very carefully about the other answers. All of them are fairly
neutral, so unfortunately positive/ negative isn’t an option here.

A) doesn’t fit because both authors are discussing whether something is a right or a
privilege; the idea that voting might be a “preference” (as opposed to a privilege, which
Sanford does mention) is not discussed at all.

B) works. Voting = a particular action, and both passages are essentially devoted to
discussing whether voting is a right and for whom. Sanford states in the first line that it is a
privilege (that is, not a right), whereas Anthony makes clear that she believes the opposite.

C) is off-topic and too broad. The passages aren’t devoted to explaining “the role of a specific
principle within a democratic system” at all. They're arguments about who gets to vote and

why.

The answer is therefore B).

289

--- PAGE 289 ---
Note that if a question states that a particular feature of both passages is the same, (e.g., “The
purpose of both passages is to...”), you may sometimes be able to answer it by reading only
one of the passages. If the feature in question is true for one passage, it must automatically
be true for the other.

For example, consider the following question:

In context of each passage as a whole, the
questions in lines 15-16 of Passage | and lines
82-83 of Passage 2 primarily serve to

A) criticize a procedure.

B) defend an action.

C) sympathize with a perspective,
D) underscore a point.

To simplify things, you can start by reading lines 15-16 of Passage 1: Do women have to vote in
order to receive the protection of man? (Alternately, if you prefer to use Passage 2, you can read
lines 82-83: The only question left to be settled now is: Are women persons?)

Why does Sanford pose this question? It’s a rhetorical question, so he already knows what
the answer is. (No, wonten don’t need to vote in order to receive man’s protection.) Why bother to
ask a question then? For stylistic flair that serves to emphasize, i.e., underscore, his point.
None of the other answers makes sense.

Because the question itself tells you that whatever is true for Passage 1 must also be true for
Passage 2, you can - if you feel comfortable doing so, or if you are pressed for time - skip

reading the relevant lines in Passage 2 entirely.

If you'd like to test out this strategy in an Official Guide question, you can see Test 5, #41.

290

--- PAGE 290 ---
stg CANES nn te A mt nS SE GUM DS AR i tC nA

FAN Nana

oi era Soe

seep e gg ag ROM EEN ATL Fr gn ENE I

2.

Paired Passage Exercises

Passage 1 is adapted from a 1774 speech to Congress by
Joseph Galloway. Passage 2 is adapted from Alexander
Hamilton,” A Full Vindication of the Measures of the
Congress.” Both were written in 1774. As the British imposed
a series of taxes on the American colonists, tensions grew
between those who wished to remain loyal to Britain and
those who wanted greater independence.

Passage 1

10

a5

20

25

30

35

40

The discovery of the Colonies was made under
a commission granted by the supreme authority of the
British State, that they have been settled under that
authority, and therefore are truly the property of that
State. Parliamentary jurisdiction has been constantly
exercised over them from their first settlement; its
executive authority has ever run through all their
inferior political systems: the Colonists have ever
sworn allegiance to the British State, and have been
considered, both by the State and by themselves, as
subjects of the British Government. Protection and
allegiance are reciprocal duties; the one cannot exist
without the other, The Colonies cannot claim the
protection of Britain upon any principle of reason or
law, while they deny its supreme authority. Upon this
ground the authority of Parliament stands too firm to be
shaken by any arguments whatever; and therefore to
deny that authority, and at the same time to declare
their incapacity to be represented, amounts to a full
and explicit declaration of independence.

As to the tax, it is neither unjust or oppressive, it
being rather a relief than a burthen*; but it is want of
constitutional principle in the authority that passed it,
which is the ground for complaint. This, and this only,
is the source of American grievances...

If we do not approve of a representation in
Parliament, let us ask for a participation in the freedom
and power of the English constitution in some other
mode of incorporation...] therefore beseech you, by the
respect you are bound to pay to the instructions of your
constituents, by the regard you have for the honor and
safety of your country, and as you wish to avoid a war
with Great-Britain, which must terminate, at al] events
in the ruin of America, not to rely on a denial of the
authority of Parliament, a refusal to be represented...
because whatever protestations, in that case, may be
made to the contrary, it will prove to the world that we
intend to throw off our allegiance to the State, and to
involve the two countries in all the horrors of a civil
war,

*q burden

291

i
H
H
i
£
q
i
t
£
t
i
i
t
f
¥
i
i
t
:
t
t
t
t
i
Hi
t
t
i
1
i
1
i
H
i
t
17
i
i

i
i
i
i
f
i
i
i
i
i
3
i
i
i
3
i
3
i
i
i
3
3
3
i
t
t
f
t
i
i
i
i
|
}
i
i
$
i
i
i
}
i
i
H

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

Passage 2

That Americans are entitled to freedom, is
incontrovertible upon every rational principle. All
men have one common original: they participate in one
common nature, and consequently have one common
tight. No reason can be assigned why one man
should exercise any power, or preeminence over his
fellow creatures more than another; unless they have
voluntarily veiled him with it. Since then, Americans
have not by any act of theirs empowered the British
Parliament to make laws for them, it follows they can
have no just authority to do it.

Besides the clear voice of natural justice in this
respect, the fundamental principles of the English
constitution are in our favor. It has been repeatedly
demonstrated, that the idea of legislation, or taxation,
when the subject is not represented, is inconsistent
with that. Nor is this all, our charters, the express
conditions on which our progenitors relinquished
their native countries, and came to settle in this,
preclude every claim of ruling and taxing us without
our assent.

Every subterfuge that sophistry has been able to
invent, to evade or obscure this truth, has been refuted
by the most conclusive reasonings; so that we may
pronounce it a matter of undeniable certainty, that the
pretensions of Parliament are contradictory to the law
of nature, subversive of the British constitution, and
destructive of the faith of the most solemn compacts.

What then is the subject of our controversy with
the mother country? It is this, whether we shall
preserve that security to our lives and properties, which
the law of nature, the genius of the British constitution,
and our charters afford us or whether we shall resign
them into the hands of the British House of Commons,
which is no more privileged to dispose of them than
the Grand Mogul? What can actuate those men, who
labor to delude any of us into an opinion, that the
object of contention between the parents and the
colonies is only three pence duty upon tea? or that the
commotions in America originate in a plan, formed by
some turbulent men to erect it into a republican
government? The parliament claims a right to tax
us in all cases whatsoever; its late laws are in virtue of
that claim. How ridiculous then is it to affirm, that we
are quarrelling for the trifling Aim of three pence a
pound on tea; when it is evidently the principle against
which we contend.

--- PAGE 291 ---
Which choice best describes the relationship
between the two passages?

Galloway in Passage 1 would most likely
characterize Hamilton’s statement in lines 48-51 of
Passage 2 (“Americans...do it”) as

A) Passage 2 presents a personal account of a
conflict that Passage | discusses objectively.

B) Passage 2 rejects a line of reasoning that
Passage | advances.

C) Passage 2 takes a practical view of a reaction
that Passage | approaches idealistically.

D) Passage 2 provides an example of an idea
described in Passage 1.

A) too radical to be taken seriously by the
majority of citizens.

B) inconsistent with the need to establish reliable
systems of trade.

C) a principled defense of national sovereignty.

D) a troubling misconception of an established
relationship.

Both passages discuss the tensions between
Britain and the Colonies in terms of

Galloway in Passage | and Hamilton in Passage 2

would be most likely to agree with which of the
following statements?

A) financial matters.

A) The English constitution is worthy of great
respect.

B) Regulations that conflict with the laws of
nature must be overturned.

C) Historical ties between nations should be
preserved at all cost.

B) moral obligations.
C) religious freedom.
D) historical conflicts.

The author of Passage 2 would most likely respond
to the statement in lines 13-17 of Passage |
(“The Colonies... whatever”) with

D) Individuals should only be taxed in proportion
to their incomes.

A) approval, because levying taxes is a central
purpose of government.

B) skepticism, because the actions of Parliament
are at odds with natural and British law.

C) scorn, because no individual has the inherent
authority to rule over others.

D) acceptance, because the Colonies must
reaffirm their allegiance to Britain.

292

--- PAGE 292 ---
NF AR RM DE EN ERO RT TROL MEN ESE CRES. ol NEKE ONT

2. Passage 1 is adapted from the “Atlanta Compromise” speech
by Booker T. Washington, delivered in 1895, Passage 2 is
adapted from a 1903 essay by W.E.B. DuBois. DuBois and
Washington were among the most influential leaders in the

African-American community during the late nineteenth and

early twentieth centuries.

Passage 1

Ignorant and inexperienced, it is not strange that in
the first years of our new life we began at the top
instead of at the bottom; that a seat in Congress or the
state legislature was more sought than real estate or

5 industrial skill; that the political convention or stump
speaking had more attractions than starting a dairy farm
or truck garden. A ship lost at sea for many days
suddenly sighted a friendly vessel. From the mast of
the unfortunate vessel was seen a signal, “Water,

10 water; we die of thirst!” The answer from the friendly
vessel at once came back, “Cast down your bucket
where you are.” A second time the signal, “Water,
water; send us water!” ran up from the distressed
vessel, and was answered, “Cast down your bucket

15 where you are.” And a third and fourth signal for water
was answered, “Cast down your bucket where you are.”
The captain of the distressed vessel, at last heeding
the injunction, cast down his bucket, and it came up
full of fresh, sparkling water from the mouth of the

20 Amazon River. To those of my race who depend on
bettering their condition in a foreign land or who
underestimate the importance of cultivating friendly
relations with the Southern white man, who is their
next-door neighbor, I would say: “Cast down your

25 bucket where you are” — cast it down in making
friends in every manly way of the people of all races
by whom we are surrounded...

No race can prosper till it learns that there is as
much dignity in tilling a field as in writing a poem. It is

30 at the bottom of life we must begin, and not at the top.
To those of the white race who [ook to the incoming
of those of foreign birth and strange tongue and habits
for the prosperity of the South, were I permitted 1
would repeat what I say to my own race, “Cast down

35 your bucket where you are.” Cast it down among the
eight millions of Negroes whose habits you know,
whose fidelity and love you have tested...As we have
proved our loyalty to you in the past, in nursing your
children, watching by the sick-bed of your mothers

40 and fathers, and often following them with tear-
dimmed eyes to their graves, so in the future, in our
humble way, we shall stand by you with a devotion that
no foreigner can approach, ready to lay down our lives,

293

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

if need be, in defense of yours, interlacing our
industrial, commercial, civil, and religious life with
yours in a way that shall make the interests of

both races one. In all things that are purely social
we can be as separate as the fingers, yet one as the
hand in all things essential to mutual progress.

Passage 2

The Negro race, like all races, is going to be saved
by its exceptional men. The problem of education,
then, among Negroes must first of all deal with the
Talented Tenth; it is the problem of developing the
Best of this race that they may guide the Mass away
from the contamination and death of the Worst, in
their own and other races, Now the training of men
is a difficult and intricate task. Its technique is a
matter for educational experts, but its object is for the
vision of seers. Lf we make money the objects of
man-training, we shall develop money-makers but
not necessarily men; if we make technical skill the
object of education, we may possess artisans but not,
in nature, men....

1 am an earnest advocate of manual training and
trade teaching for black boys, and for white boys,
too. I believe that next to the founding of Negro
colleges the most valuable addition to Negro
education since the war, has been industrial training
for black boys. Nevertheless, I insist that the object
of al] true education is not to make men carpenters,
it is to make carpenters men; there are two means of
making the carpenter a man, each equally important:
the first is to give the group and community in which
he works, liberally trained teachers and leaders to
teach him and his family what life means; the second
is to give him sufficient intelligence and technical
skill to make him an efficient workman; the first
object demands the Negro college and college-bred
men-—not a quantity of such colleges, but a few of
excellent quality; not too many college-bred men, but
enough to leaven the lump, to inspire the masses, to
raise the Talented Tenth to leadership; the second
object demands a good system of common schools,
well-taught, conveniently located and properly
equipped.

--- PAGE 293 ---
Which tdea is supported by the authors of both

passages?

A)
B)
C)

D)

The primary goal of education is to ensure
skiJl and efficiency.

It is possible to find fulfillment in a wide
range of occupations.

Formal education should be reserved for
only the most talented students.

Individuals can most effectively improve
their lives through education.

Which statement identifies a central conflict
between the two passages?

A) Washington proposes a broad system of education,

B)

C)

D)

2°
Cs )

while DuBois rejects that approach as
impractical.

Washington adopts an international perspective,
while DuBois focuses on domestic
interests.

Washington focuses on improving the prospects
of a group as a whole, while DuBois
advocates the elevation of a narrow elite.

Washington describes the nature of a problem,
while DuBois emphasizes a possible
solution.

DuBois in Passage 2 would most likely have
responded to lines 29-30 (“It is...top”) of
Passage | with

A)
B)
C)

D)

appreciation, because citizens of a democracy
should not have to demonstrate their loyalty.
sympathy, because citizens of a democracy
should play an active role in their communities.
disagreement, because true freedom cannot be
attained without education.

skepticism, because it ignores the capabilities
of certain individuals.

294

Based on Passage |, Washington would most likely
characterize the viewpoint described by

DuBois in lines 78-85 of Passage 2 (“the first...
equipped”) as

A)
B)
C)
D)

economically impractical.
generally persuasive.
overly ambitious.

beyond reproach.

--- PAGE 294 ---
3. Passage 1 is adapted from the website locavores.com,
© 2010. Passage 2 is adapted from Ronald Bailey,
i “The Food Miles Mistake,” © 2008 Reason magazine.

Passage 1

Our food now travels an average of 1,500 miles
; before ending up on our plates. This globalization of
the food supply has serious consequences for the
environment, our health, our communities and our
5 tastebuds. Much of the food grown in the breadbasket
surrounding us must be shipped across the country to
distribution centers before it makes its way back to
our supermarket shelves. Because uncounted costs
of this long distance journey (air pollution and global
10 warming, the ecological costs of large scale
monoculture, the loss of family farms and local
community dollars) are not paid for at the checkout
counter, many of us do not think about them at all,
What is eaten by the great majority of North
15 Americans comes from a global everywhere, yet
from nowhere that we know in particular, How many
of our children even know what a chicken eats or
how an onion grows? The distance from which our
food comes represents our separation from the
20 knowledge of how and by whom what we consume
is produced, processed, and transported. And yet, the
quality of a food is derived not merely from its genes
and the greens that fed it, but from how it is prepared
and cared for all the way until it reaches our mouths,
25 If the production, processing, and transport of what
we eat is destructive of the land and of human
community — as it very often is — how can we
understand the implications of our own participation
in the global food system when those processes are
30 located elsewhere and so are obscured from us?
How can we act responsibly and effectively for change
if we do not understand how the food system works
and our own role within it.
Corporations, which are the principal beneficiaries
35 of a global food system, now dominate the production,
processing, distribution, and consumption of food,
but alternatives are emerging which together
could form the basis for foodshed development.
Just as many farmers are recognizing the social and
40 environmental advantages to sustainable agriculture,
so are many Consumers coming to appreciate the
benefits of fresh and sustainably produced food. Such
producers and consumers are being linked through such

Sem OCA GAWADAETHNN Statens

BMA ORNS I,

?
i
Zz
¥
3
y
i
i

SRR ee Laan eR

EAA NO Na CER ARIE ASAIN,

i
g
3
i

SPR OURNY DOR DALAM RRBs LA is GOO AN ESO

295

innovative arrangements as community supported

45 agriculture and farmers’ markets. Alternative
producers, alternative consumers, and alternative small
entrepreneurs are rediscovering community and finding
common ground.

Passage 2

In their recent policy primer for the Mercatus

50 Center at George Mason University, economic
geographer Pierre Desrochers and economic
consultant Hiroko Shimizu challenge the notion that
food miles — the distance food travels from farm
to plate ~ are a good sustainability indicator. As

55 Desrochers and Shimizu point out, the food trade
has been historically driven by urbanization. As
agriculture became more efficient, people were
liberated from farms and able to develop other skills
that helped raise general living standards. People

60 freed from having to scrabble for food, for instance,
could work in factories, write software, or become
physicians. Modernization is a process in which people
get further and further away from the farm.

Modern technologies like canning and refrigeration

65 made it possible to extend the food trade from staple
grains and spices to fruits, vegetables, and meats. As a
result, world trade in fruits and vegetables—fresh and
processed — doubled in the 1980s and increased by
30 percent between 1990 and 2001. Fruits and

70 vegetables accounted for 22 percent of the exports of
developing economies in 2001. If farmers, processors,
shippers, and retailers did not profit from providing
distant consumers with these foods, the foods
wouldn’t be on store shelves. And consumers, of

75 course, benefit from being able to buy fresh foods
year around.

So just how much carbon dioxide is emitted by
transporting food from farm to fork? Desrochers and
Shimizu cite a comprehensive study done by the

80 United Kingdom's Department of Environment, Food
and Rural Affairs (OEFRA) which reported that
82 percent of food miles were generated within the
U.K. Consumer shopping trips accounted for
48 percent and trucking for 31 percent of British

85 miles. Air freight amounted to less than { percent of
food miles. In total, food transportation accounted for
only 1.8 percent of Britain's carbon dioxide emissions.

--- PAGE 295 ---
Which choice best describes the relationship
between the two passages?

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

A) Passage 2 offers an alternative explanation for
a phenomenon that Passage | describes.

B) Passage 2 proposes a solution to a problem
that Passage | presents.

C) Passage 2 expresses doubt about the benefits
of a practice that Passage I advocates.

D) Passage 2 provides historical context fora
tradition that Passage 1 discusses.

A) Lines 64-66 (“Modern...meats’’)
B) Lines 74-76 (“And...around”)
C) Lines 82-83 (“82 percent... UK”)
D) Lines 86-87 (“In...emissions”)

How would the author of Passage | most likely
respond to the authors of Passage 2’s claim about
2 “fresh foods” (line 75)?
The authors of both passages would most likely
agree with which of the following statements
about food?

A) With skepticism, because the nutritional value
of food transported over long distances may
be compromised.

B) With approval, because people should
consume locally produced food whenever
possible,

C) With disdain, because the corporate model of

food production cannot be altered.

With interest, because new technologies may

preserve foods for longer periods.

A) People must understand the food production
system in order to make informed choices
about their health,

B) A significant amount of the food consumed
today is not produced locally. i D)

C) Transporting food over long distances may
reduce its quality.

D) The corporate model of food production is
a necessary aspect of urbanization,

Which choice provides the best evidence for the
answer to the previous question?

How would the author of Passage 2 most likely

respond to the discussion in lines 8-14 of
Passage | (“Because...all”)?

A) Lines 5-6 (“Much...country”)
B) Lines 14-15 (“What...everywhere”)
C) Lines 21-24 (“And...mouths”)

A) He would claim that most pollution comes D) Lines 37-38 (“alternatives. ..development’)

from sources other than food transportation.

B) He would assert that access to foods grown far
away has led more people to adopt healthful
diets.

C) He would argue that transporting food over
long distances is the best way to feed an
increasingly urban population.

D) He would point out that most family farms
today exist by choice rather than necessity.

296

--- PAGE 296 ---
AAR SCI RE NNN

:
bd
}
i
i
i
4
i
é

seetinre dS genmeen ese UTES aA. SyecaSeP RA shee OETA IE

Explanations: Paired Passage Exercises

1.1B

The passages express opposing viewpoints, so the correct answer must convey disagreement B) is
correct because it is most consistent with that relationship: the author of Passage 2 rejects the idea
that the Colonies must go along with Parliament’s demands because they are fully ruled by
Britain (=a line of reasoning), and instead states that Parliament's laws must be rejected because
they are unjust. Although both passages are at times written in the first-person plural (we),
neither is actually personal, eliminating A). An argument could be made that the author of
Passage 2 is somewhat idealistic in his insistence on freedom and his appeals to the law of nature,
but C) states exactly the opposite - that the more practical, cautious author of Passage 1 is too
idealistic. D) is incorrect because the passages only present conflicting arguments; Passage 2 does
not provide an example of any idea discussed in Passage 1.

124A

Both passages discuss the conflict between Britain and the Colonies in terms of taxation, which is
another way of saying “financial matters.” Passage 1 does so in lines 21-25, and Passage 2 does so
in line 55 and again in lines 76-87,

1.3B

Lines 13-17 of Passage 1 essentially state Galloway’s point: because the Colonies are subject to
British protection and rule, they have no grounds for attacking any decision made by Parliament.
Clearly, that’s a statement with which Hamilton in Passage 2 would disagree, so you can assume
that the correct answer will be negative. “Approval” and “acceptance” are both positive, so A)
and D) can be eliminated, Now, why would Hamilton disagree? The key lines are 64-76, where
Hamilton makes a clear distinction between the law of nature and the genius of the British
constitution, which guarantee the Colonists’ freedom, and the unjust laws of Parliament, which
contradict both, That is directly consistent with B). C) is too broad and off-topic: Hamilton says
nothing about whether “any individual” is innately qualified to rule. He is only concerned with
specific, unjust acts of Parliament.

1.4D

Because the passages contain opposing arguments, you can assume that the answer to this
question is negative. C), the only positive answer, can thus be eliminated. A) might sound
plausible, but Galloway does not discuss rebellion against Britain in terms of how “the majority
of citizens” would perceive it. He only discusses the potential outcome (war). B) is completely
off-topic: Galloway refers to the issue of taxation but says nothing about trade, reliable or
otherwise. That leaves D), which accurately captures Galloway’s concern: the current relationship
between Britain and the Colonies has existed since the Colonies were founded (=an established
relationship), and the Colonists’ rejection of it would lead to war (=troubling).

415A

This is an example of a question in which relying too heavily on general points can get you in
trouble. If your first instinct when you read A) was to eliminate that answer, you fell into the
trap. Clearly, Galloway in Passage 1 is favorable toward the British constitution, And, based on
Hamilton's insistence on the injustices committed by the British (Passage 2), you might assume
that Hamilton is opposed to the British constitution as well. In reality, however, his argument is
subtler than that: he makes a clear distinction between the acts of Parliament, which he opposes,
and the British constitution, which he views as genitis (line 72). A) is thus correct. B) is supported

297

--- PAGE 297 ---
by Passage 2 but not Passage 1. C), while somewhat consistent with Passage 1, is far too extreme.
Galloway believes that the dispute over taxation is relatively minor; there is nothing to suggest
that he believes ties should be preserved at all cost. D) is completely off-topic: neither author
discusses how individuals should be taxed, only whether Britain has the right to tax the Colonies
in the way that it has done.

2.1B

Although DuBois and Washington disagree about the best way for African Americans to improve
their status, both authors are clear about the fact that both professional and manual jobs (= a wide
range of occupations) can offer rewards. DuBois states that No race cai prosper till it leartts that
there is as muuch dignity in tilling a field as in writing a poem (lines 28-29), and Washington makes
clear that he is an earnest advocate for manual training. Washington also makes clear throughout
Passage 2 that he only considers traditional education and preparation for middie/upper-class
careers appropriate for exceptional men, but that the rest can find fulfillment in manual labor.

2.2C

The easiest way to answer this question is to use the main points. Passage 1: African Americans
should start @ bottom, work up; Passage 2: Focus on “talented tenth.” The phrase talented tenth
refers to the cultivation of a small group of elites, whereas DuBois in Passage 1 is primarily
concerned with raising the prospects of African Americans as a whole, C) is thus correct. A) does
not fit because Washington in Passage 2 proposes a system of education, not DuBois in Passage 1.
For B), Passage 1 does include references to a foreign land and those of foreign birth, but DuBois’
principle concern is the situation in the United States. It is far too big of a stretch to describe his
perspective as “international.” D) is incorrect because each passage focuses on presenting a
different solution to the same problem.

2.3D

Because the authors disagree in their approach to improving the prospects of African Americans,
you can assume that the correct answer to this question is negative. “Appreciation” and
“sympathy” are positive, so A) and B) can be eliminated. C) is off-topic: the issue is not whether
education is necessary for freedom, but whether it is necessary for economic (and, to a lesser
degree, social) advancement. That leaves D), which is consistent with the main point of Passage 2:
Washington is in favor of cultivating an elite that would start “at the top.” From that perspective,
DuBois’ attitude fails to take into account (“ignores”) the fact that certain individuals are
exceptionally capable and should be singled out as such.

2.4C

What is the viewpoint expressed in lines 78-85? That education should be used to create an
African-American elite (“the Talented Tenth”) who, it can be assumed, would seek prestigious
jobs and titles. What would DuBois think of that? Given his focus on bringing everyone up from
the bottom, he would probably have a somewhat negative attitude toward that idea. B) is
straightforwardly positive and can be eliminated. Be careful with D), however: beyond reproach
means “beyond criticism,” i.e., perfect, so this answer is actually extremely positive and can be
eliminated as well. A) is off-topic: DuBois does not discuss the disadvantages of trying to raise
people too far beyond their existing position in economic terms. That leaves C), which is correct.
If DuBois believes that African Americans as a whole should start at the bottom and focus on
practical, manual labor only, then the idea of creating a substantial group of elites who would
jump straight to the top would likely strike him as excessively ambitious.

298

--- PAGE 298 ---
PARNELL INO Re MONEE GOR EEE

ASA DOMED TAS

PD WBA REL AN LEE SILL MBE OASERE SLBA LS

3.1C

The easiest way to answer this question is to use the main points. Main point of Passage 1:
industrial food = bad, buy local (=a practice). Main point of Passage 2: buying local doesn’t help
the environment (=expresses doubt). Relationship: negative. The only answer with negative
wording is C), making it the answer.

3.2B

Lines 5-8 of Passage 1 state that Much of the food grown in the breadbasket surrounding us must be
shipped across the country to distribution centers before it makes its way back to our supermarket shelves.
The author of Passage 2 does not make the point nearly as explicitly, but he does state in lines 67-
69 that world trade in fruits, vegetables - fresh and processed - doubled in the 1980s and increased by 30
percent between 1990 ad 2001. These lines directly suggest that people consume an enormous
amount of food produced far away, an idea consistent with B). Only the author of Passage 1
would agree with A) and C), and only the author of Passage 2 would agree with D).

3.3-4 A, D

Start by defining “the discussion” in lines 8-14 of Passage 1: transporting food is bad for the
environment. What would the author of Passage 2 think of that idea? If you paid close attention
to the conclusion, the answer should be fairly straightforward: the environmental impact has
been overstated. In addition, the end of Passage 2 gives you the answer to the following question.
If you don’t remember what it says, the fact that D) in 3.4 provides a line reference at the end of
passage - where the main point is usually located - suggests that you should check that answer
first. In the conclusion of Passage 2, the author is pretty clear that food miles account for only a
small portion (1.8 percent) of Britain’s carbon-dioxide emissions. Therefore, most carbon-dioxide
emissions (98.2 percent, to be exact) must come from “other sources.” That makes A) the answer
to 3.3 and D) the answer to 3.4.

3.5-6 A, C

The biggest danger with this question is that you will take it at face value. You might reason that
because the authors of Passage 1 are in favor of fresh food, they would obviously have a positive
attitude toward it. The problem, however, is that the author of Passage 2 is talking about fresh
food that has been transported long distances ~- exactly what the author of Passage 1 is against. So
the correct answer must indicate opposition, narrowing your options for 3.5 to A) and C).
“Disdain” is on the strong side, however, and lines 39-48 indicate that the author of Passage 1
believes that the corporate food model can be altered. C) can thus be eliminated. The correct lines
in 3.6 must therefore convey the idea that food transported over long distances isn’t quite so
healthy. A) is correct because in context of the author of Passage 1’s argument, the statement that
the quality of a food is derived...from how it is prepared and cared for all the way until it reaches our
mouths implies that food transported halfway around the world might not be so fresh and high-
quality after all.

299

--- PAGE 299 ---
Graphics and Data Analysis

ee ene eoeveeuene ee en neevee ee eansean eee ne eee unse sees reeeruteeveeneeee ne eseosteevnuseeneees

If youre not accustomed to working with graphs and tables, data analysis questions can be
intimidating. Without a doubt, shifting from sentences and paragraphs to lines and numbers can
be jarring. You're solidly in reading mode, then wham! You have to answer a question about
a... pie chart? It’s a change that can easily leave you feeling off-balance.

The good news, however, is that graphic-based questions are rarely as complicated as they
appear. No matter how unfamiliar the terminology may be, all of the information you need to
answer these questions will be right in front of you. In fact, they are set up precisely so that you
can figure them without outside knowledge. If you stay calm and consider things carefully,
there’s a good chance you'll be fine.

In fact, questions that involve graphics are often simpler than they initially appear. Although
graphics are always related in some way to the passages they accompany, many data analysis
questions can be answered on the basis of the graphics alone - you do not need to take the
passage into account at all.

Data analysis questions can be divided into three main types:
1) Questions that require the graphic only.

2) Questions that refer to both the graphic and the passage, but that can be answered
using only one or the other.

3) Questions that require both the graphic and the passage.

While the first and third types are fairly straightforward in terms of what information you need
to base your answer on, the second type can be somewhat trickier. Because these questions refer
to the passage as well as the graphic, it is very easy to think that you must look at both, In many
cases, however, doing so can be unnecessarily time consuming and confusing. In this chapter,
we're going to break down examples of all three types so that you can understand what you
need to consider and when.

Before we get started, though, one note: If you are uncomfortable working with graphs but are
otherwise a strong reader, you should consider planning to glance through the graph questions
and leaving any ones that you cannot answer quickly until the end of the test. It is not worth
wasting three or four minutes going back and forth between a passage and a graphic for the sake
of a single question when you could be answering several text-based questions in the same
amount of time.

300

--- PAGE 300 ---
Reading Graphs: Finding the Point and Skimming
Although graphs and passages might strike you as two completely different entities, reading a
text and interpreting a graph have more in common than you might suspect. One simply
conveys information in words while the other conveys it in bars and numbers.
Like passages, most graphs have a “point” to convey, and they are often much more efficient at
conveying it than written words. In fact, that’s precisely why they are used. (Ever heard the
expression “a picture is worth a thousand words”?) Rather than resort to lengthy explanations,
science and social-science writers often choose to represent data visually in order to help readers
quickly obtain a big-picture understanding of complex situations,
Just as you can skim passages to get a general idea of what they are saying, you can also “skim”
graphs visually to get a general sense of the information they convey. And again, your goal is to
avoid getting caught in the details for as long as possible.
Here are some questions to consider:

* What is the shape of the graph? Does it go up, down, or both?

* Are changes steady, or is there a big jump somewhere? If so, where?

¢ Is there an “outlier” point with a value very different from that of the other points?

* Are there items whose values don’t change at all?

* If there are multiple lines, do the lines ever meet?

If you approach data analysis questions with a general understanding of what the graphic
conveys, you can often identify correct answers or eliminate multiple incorrect answers quickly.

For example, consider the following graph:

World Biofuel Consumption, 1900-2050

%
Fs
g
4
3
é
z

a 60 papeoeu mien eermmmenenranta bn ATT ARE OSE Sets A ETANALL ESE TERT i PEON ees renner a
v
| 50 pa wrens
: 2
j é 40 Sra Ra rT OS OT OS TRIN OED ENED NOY RED RES ERNE TNE nA EE cm eee
5 30 er Sot
8 20 nen
i = 10 Sierra i yawn maar nh ae tA ms sg nen tna
& 1900 1925 1950 1975 2000 2025E 2050E

—*— Biofuel (E = Estimated)

AM a ey WONG pe OM as ANN ARR

301

4
g

--- PAGE 301 ---
The first thing to notice is that this graph displays a unit of measurement ~ the exajoule (title of
the y-axis) - that very few non-scientists will be familiar with. That’s the type of wording that
makes these questions seem so difficult. In reality, the terminology is completely irrelevant. As
long as you understand that an exajoule is a unit of measurement, you can ignore it.

So what you re looking at is this:

ADA rte pan ES an a needa tisanmnaorn eae as RIE ar Bsa ROE st a

World Biofuel Consumption, 1900-2050

1 0 ae nat gn Ad ene RR el OR aa anamendantnate tn SA EEA rE ANS

oor penne apace maaan ets Seeeenaenaanens aeamentonraes

1900 1925 1950 1975 2000 2025E 2050E

With the terminology taken away, you can focus on the essential: the graph represents a steady
increase over time. In addition, values increase by about the same amount (5-10 points) during
most of the intervals, except for the period from 2025 to 2050, which is larger (about 15 points).
At no point do values fall, and no two values are ever the same.
Now, let’s consider the title of the graph: World Biofuel Consumption, 1900-2050. The point of a
title is to tell you what something is about, and graphs are no different. In this case, the title
combined with what we've already determined tells us that biofuel use rose steadily throughout
the twentieth century and will continue to rise steadily into the twenty-first.
The “main point” could thus be something along the lines of “BF use f 20-21C.” Using that
information, we can infer that the correct answer to any accompanying question must be
consistent with that idea.
We can also infer that answer choices indicating any of the following would be incorrect:

¢ Biofuel consumption peaked in a year prior to 2050.

* Biofuel consumption decreased at any point.

* Biofuel consumption in the 20 century was greater than it will be in the 21°,

* The largest rise in biofuel consumption occurred at a point other than 2025-2050.

To be clear, you do not need to figure all of this out before looking at the answers. Your goal is
simply to get the gist so that you can eliminate any answer that is inconsistent with it.

302

--- PAGE 302 ---
Reading Between the Lines
Some questions may ask you to read between the lines of the graph - literally. That is, they will
ask you to determine information about points that are not directly represented on the graph but

that can be determined from the information provided.

For example, take a look at this graph:

ANWAR lt ENE TE NRO oe. . > ee PEAT ALLE A NE cmon mere et

Annual U.S, Public Transportation Ridership, 1920-2011

Billions

0 Lp ny ep

1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010

All of the years listed along the x-axis are in multiples of 10 (1920, 1930, etc.); however, there are
also tick marks halfway between each set of years. You could therefore encounter a question that
looks like this:

According to the graph, which statement is true
i about the number of riders who used public
transportation in 1945?

A) It was substantially higher than the number of |
riders who used public transportation in 1950.

B) It was wildly out of proportion to the number
of riders who used transportation during the
previous two decades.

C) It was similar to the number of riders who used
public transportation a decade later. i

D)_ It was lower than the number of riders who i
used public transportation in 2010. i

When you look at the graph, you will of course notice that 1945 does not appear. Both 1940 and
1950 do appear, though, so the tick mark between them logically represents 1945.

What does the graph tell us about the number of public transportation riders in 1945? Drawing a
line from the tick mark, we can see that it was a little under 20 billion. (Remember that the
numbers represent billions; the zeroes are omitted for the sake of readability.) It’s a little lower
than in 1950 but otherwise around the same as it was during the surrounding decades.

nen ontie

MO att

303

hn ea

--- PAGE 303 ---
Now that we've figured out some basics, we’ re going to look at the answers:

A) No. Remember we just said that the number in 1945 was lower than it was in 1950,

B) The extreme phrase wildly out of proportion immediately suggests that this answer is
wrong. Besides, the only part of the graph that’s really out of proportion to the rest is the
part representing 1980. So we're going to assume this answer is incorrect.

C) A decade later was 1955. If we look at the tick mark between 1950 and 1960 and

trace a line up (or just compare visually), we end up with a point in roughly the same

range as that for 1945. So C) works. Just to be safe, though, we’re going to check D).

D) No, this is backwards. Ridership in 2010 was lower. That means ridership in 1945
was higher.

So the answer is C).

Multiple Variables
The graphs we've looked at so far have contained only one variable - that is, they have only
charted the rise and/or fall of a single factor. Unfortunately, many of the graphs you are asked
to work with on the SAT will contain more than one variable. When this is the case, you should
always start by noting the key difference between the lines (or sectors, in the case of a bar
graph or pie chart).
The biggest difference (or similarity) between the lines is the point of the graph.

Here are some questions to consider:

¢ Do the lines move in a similar way, or do they move in different ways? (e.g., do both
lines rise or fall, or does one line rise while the other falls?)

* Is one line consistently high and the other consistently low?
¢ Do both lines ever pass through the same point?

¢ If there is a large increase/ decrease, does it occur in the same place for both lines, or
does it occur in different places?

I cannot stress how important this step is, While it may seem as if these questions are asking you
to process an enormous amount of information, the reality is that only a small portion of what
you see will actually be relevant.

Furthermore, the questions will almost invariably target the most significant differences between

the lines or sectors. If you've already established those differences upfront, you're already most
of the way to the answer.

304

--- PAGE 304 ---
Let's consider this somewhat altered version of a graph we examined a little while ago:

World Consumption: Biofuel vs. Nuclear Power, 1900-2025

~”A
x
|
°
—
g
f
-_
q
=
End
=
gE
3
“a
a
3
i)

- = rs oe Leeann etnias '

1900 1925 1950 1975 2000 2025
(estimated)

- # ~Biofuel =*Nuclear Power

When we look at the graph, the difference between the two energy sources is striking: biofuel
use rose slightly and gradually throughout the twentieth century and will continue its slow,
steady increase in the twenty-first century. In contrast, nuclear power use rose sharply and
significantly beginning in the mid-twentieth century and will continue to increase substantially
in the twenty-first century.

Our “main point” could therefore be something like “NP way up, BF up slowly” (nuclear power
use is going way up, while biofuel use is rising slowly).

We could even be asked to deal with three variables:

World Energy Consumption 1900-2025

rr re Rt a a tA pono crmnnesgg Reena
he. eww ae samaiy mementos

; 1925 1950 1975 2000 2025
(estimated)

- @-Biofuel -7*--Oil  -—®-~ Nuclear Power

WA RARER, AE OY NMEA ON

Here, the main thing to notice is that biofuel use rose slightly and slowly; nuclear power use rose
significantly and quickly; and oil use was somewhere in the middle.

SLseavatarce

305

--- PAGE 305 ---
Which choice is supported by data in the graph?

A)
B)
C)

D)

The amount of oi] and the amount of nuclear
power used in 1950 were roughly the same.
By 2025, more energy will be obtained from
nuclear energy than from oil or biofuel.

The use of biofuels is predicted to decline
between 2000 and 2025.

Oil use rose at a dramatically higher rate than
did biofuel use between 1975 and 2000.

Now let's look at a few more graph-only questions. The most straightforward of these will
simply ask you to identify the answer best supported by the graph. Often, you will be able to
answer these questions just by keeping the big picture in mind.

Let’s consider the second version of the graph on the previous page, the one with the three
variables. (Note that on the SAT, the actual questions frequently appear on different pages from
the graphs themselves, so you must be comfortable flipping back and forth.)

Remember the big picture: nuclear energy ~ high; oil - medium; biofuel - low. In addition, the
lines for oil and nuclear power are about equal at 1975.

We could work through these answers one by one (and in fact we’re going to do so in a
moment), but first let’s consider the shortcut. The overall point of the graph is that nuclear
energy has been way outstripping biofuel and oil for more than a century and will continue to
do so in the immediate future.

Which answer comes closest to saying that? B). It simply states what the graph shows most
obviously - by 2025, nuclear energy will be far ahead.

Or, playing process of elimination:

A) is incorrect because oil and biofuel use were about the same in 1975, not 1950.

C) is incorrect because the use of biofuel is expected to increase slightly, not decrease.

D) is incorrect because although oil use did rise at a higher rate than biofuel use between 1975
and 2000, it did so at a slightly higher rate, not a dramatically higher rate. Don’t forget that it only

takes one wrong word to make an answer wrong.

Now we're going to try something a little bit more challenging.

306

--- PAGE 306 ---
SEAN ALAS INNS NEON coe otro

5
H
i
4

Which choice about nitrogen levels in 2011 is
supported by data in the graph?

A)

B)

C) The amount of nitrogen in the water at Mackay

D)

“Backwards” Graphs and “Trick” Answers

In all of the graphs we've looked at so far, one thing was pretty straightforward: a line going up
indicated that values were rising, and a line going down indicated that values were falling.
Simple...right? Well, maybe not always.

We're going to try an experiment. Look at the graph below, and do your best to answer the
question that follows.

Nitrogen Reduction from 2009 to 2011, Great Barrier Reef Region

12 2 ramen WS N0 TW La AS APOE TST

Percent Reduction

B pen
0 — mene os — cane nt eae meer
Cape York Wet Burdekin Mackay Fitzroy Burnett Great
Tropics Barrier
Reef

The amount of nitrogen in the water was
highest at Mackay.

Nitrogen levels at Fitzroy were lower than
than those at Cape York.

declined by the largest percentage.

The amount of nitrogen in the water was
generally comparable at Cape York and
Wet Tropics. i

If you picked A) or thought that there was more than one correct answer, congratulations -
you ve just fallen into the trap designed to ensnare all but the savviest graph readers.

The key to this question is to pay very close attention to its title. The title tells us that the bars
indicate nitrogen reduction. The higher the bar, the larger the reduction, i.e., the amount by
which nitrogen decreased. So higher bars = lower levels of nitrogen. In other words, wp = down.

If you miss that very important fact, you risk misinterpreting the graph entirely.

Let’s work through the answer choices to see how that misunderstanding can play out.

307

--- PAGE 307 ---
A) is a classic “trick” answer, placed first to sidetrack you. It plays on the assumption that you'll
see the highest bar in A) and leap to assume it indicates nitrogen levels were highest at that point.
But of course it’s not nitrogen levels that increased, but rather nitrogen reduction. Moral of the
story: if you see an answer that looks too easy when you haven’t actually thought about the
question, there’s a pretty good chance it’s wrong.

B) has a similar problem. It assumes that you'll see that the bar for Fitzroy is lower than that for
Cape York and leap to what seems to be a logical conclusion. The problem is that the graph
actually tells us that nitrogen levels decreased less at Fitzroy than they did at Cape York.
Furthermore, we know nothing about the original amount of nitrogen at either place - it’s
entirely possible that nitrogen levels at Fitzroy were higher than those at Cape York.

C) is correct because it states the point of the graph: nitrogen levels declined by a greater
percentage at Mackay than they did at any of the other regions shown. Remember: in this case,
a high bar = a large decrease.

D) is incorrect for the same reason as B) - we know nothing about the nitrogen amounts
themselves. The graph only tells us that nitrogen levels at Cape York and Wet Tropics declined
by similar percentages.

Another potential “trick” the SAT could throw at you involves not graphs but the wording of
the questions. It is important to understand that although graphic-based questions may look
very different from other questions, they are still reading questions. As a result, you must pay
careful attention to how they are phrased. Some incorrect answers may accurately convey the
information represented in the graph but not answer the particular question being asked.

One factor that you must consider is scope - that is, whether the question asks about a specific
feature or piece of data in the graph, or whether it asks you to provide an overview or
understand a general trend. If, for example, a question asks you which answer best summarizes
the information in the graph, you could see an option that correctly describes a specific aspect of
that graph. Although that answer may be factually correct, it will still be wrong because it does
not answer the question at hand.

For example, consider this graph:

_ Percent of Crops Pollinated by Bees in the United States _

308

--- PAGE 308 ---
ONES A ENE TIA PEE Re WO

EAU NP ADIN AEE RRA FEE

athe rtrd: tie Ioan cel

Which information best summarizes the information
presented in the graph?

A) Every crop grown in the United States relies on
bees for at least 20 percent of its pollination.

B) Bees are responsible for pollinating about 90
percent of apples around the world.

C) The percent of peaches pollinated by bees is
more than double the percent of cotton.

D) The percent of United States crops pollinated
by bees varies significantly. |

The question tells us that we are looking for an answer that provides an overview of the
information represented in the graph. Answers that contain specific facts and/or figures are
thus likely to be wrong.

Let’s start by considering the big picture of the graph. One striking feature is how varied the
bars are. A few of the bars are clustered near the top, a few are near the bottom, and only one is
right in the middle. If we wanted to write a main point, we could say something like
“percent/bee poll. varies, but mostly very high/low.”

While we could check out the answers one by one, we're actually going to apply that
information to create a shortcut.

Three of the answers contain specific amounts: A) contains 20 percent, B) contains 90 percent,
and C) contains double. Only D) does not contain a specific amount, and sure enough, it is
consistent with our summary: the percent of US crops pollinated by bees ranges from just above
zero all the way up to 100. So D) is the correct answer.

If you had checked the answers out one at a time, you could have gotten into some trouble.
A) is pretty obviously wrong. Some of the bars are much lower than 20 percent.

B) is a little trickier - it’s half-right, half wrong. The title of the graph tells us that we're only
dealing with crops in the United States, but this answer refers to the world. So even though the
graph does in fact indicate that bees pollinate around 90% of apples in the U.S., this answer is
beyond the scope of the passage. It could be true, but we don’t know.

C) is the answer you really need to be careful with. The bar for peaches is indeed a little more
than twice as high as itis for cotton, but this answer choice only deals with two specific crops,
whereas the question asks us to summarize. So even though this answer is true, it’s still wrong.
If you checked the answers in order, though, there’s a reasonable chance you'd get fooled and
never even look at D).

309

--- PAGE 309 ---
Based on the table, which antibiotic showed

the greatest discrepancy between its general
effectiveness and its effectiveness against MRSA?

A) Erithryomycin
B) Vancomycin
C) Penicillin
D) Rifampicin

Tables

Some questions will not use graphs at all but rather tables. For example, in a science passage
discussing the antibiotic-resistant bacteria, you could see something like the table below. MRSA
is a type of bacteria that is especially resistant to common antibiotics.

Antibiotic General General MRSA MRSA

Effectiveness % | Resistance % | Effectiveness % | Resistance %

Erithromycin 31.94 73.08

Vancomycin 100 0
Mupirocin 90.28 26.92
Penicillin 5 100
Clindamicin 83,33 30.77
Rifampicin 86.11 38.46

Don’t let the complicated names distract you. Focus on the numbers, and compare the similar
columns: effective vs. effective, resistant vs. resistant,

The main thing to notice is that the “General Effectiveness” numbers are always higher than the
“MRSA Effectiveness” numbers. Basically, the chart is telling us that antibiotics that are
generally effective are a lot less effective against MRSA. That makes sense: as stated above,
MRSA is a particularly antibiotic-resistant type of bacteria.

This question doesn’t need to be hard - remember, all the information you need is right in front
of you ~ but it does have the potential to be confusing.

The first thing to do is to make sure you're clear on what the question is asking and do some
basic work upfront to determine what sort of information the correct answer must contain.

In this case, the key word is “discrepancy” - the question is asking which antibiotic shows
the greatest difference between its general effectiveness and its effectiveness against MRSA.

The correct answer will therefore have a much higher number in the “general effectiveness”

column than in the “MRSA effectiveness” column. One by one, we're going to check each
answer. We're going to round the numbers to make things easy.

370

--- PAGE 310 ---
&
Pa
2
}
4
\
i

ne beta cae CNN er

2
'
3
f
a
&
é
zg
x
g

A) 32 vs. 27. That's pretty close. We'll leave it but assume it’s wrong.
B) 100 vs. 100. There’s no difference. Eliminate it.
C) 5 vs. 0. Pretty much the same as A). That leaves...

D) 86 vs. 62. That’s a significant difference. So D) is correct.

Paired Graphics

Another potential twist the SAT could throw at you is to pair two graphics and ask about the
relationship between them.

Once again, while these questions may look enormously complicated, the reality is that they
will almost certainly focus on the graphics’ most striking features. Only a few key pieces of
information will actually be relevant.

For example, consider the charts below:

Figure 1 Figure 2
Apps Used at Least Once a Week

Number of Apps Installed
None More than None
3% 11 to 20 20, 2% 4%

More than 9%

41 to 60
11%

6to 10
38% 1to5

47%

11 to 25
31%

26 to 40
22%

Adapted from “People Love Their Smartphones, but...” Scientific American.

311

--- PAGE 311 ---
Taken together, the graphs most directly support

the idea that

A) the number of apps people install has risen
significantly.

B) Most people use more than 10 different apps
at least one time per week,

C) people download many more apps than they
actually use.

D) people’s social networks strongly influence
their choice of apps.

Which statement most accurately describes a major

difference in the type of data represented in the two
graphs?

A) Figure | emphasizes the preferences of
individual users, whereas Figure 2 emphasizes
the preferences of groups.

B) Figure | focuses on the quantity of technology
accessed, whereas Figure 2 focuses on the
frequency of ifs use.

C) Figure | depicts a theoretical outcome, whereas
Figure 2 depicts an actual result.

D) Figure | conveys the habits of new app users,

whereas Figure 2 conveys the habits of
longtime users.

Question #1: When you look at a pair of charts like this, the first thing you want to notice is
whether any of the sectors are particularly large or small. Figure 2 should grab your attention
because one of its sectors is so large - almost 50%. In contrast, the sectors in Figure 1 are
distributed a bit more evenly. You can assume that difference will be significant.

Next, consider what information the charts reveal.

Figure 1 shows the number of apps that people install. When you add up the relevant sectors,
you'll find that 53% of people have between 11 and 40 apps, and 51% of people have more than
25 apps. So basically, the point of the chart is that most people have a lot of apps.

Figure 2 shows how many apps people actually use on a regular basis. This is where that huge
sector becomes important. It indicates that a significant number of people (47%) use only 1-5
apps once a week or more. Furthermore, the next-largest sector indicates that an additional 38%
use only 6-10 apps that often. We know from Figure 1, however, that most people have more
than 11 apps installed, and many of them have more than 25 apps.

The difference between the number of apps people install and the number of apps they regularly
use suggests that people install many apps they don’t use. And that is what C) says,

A) is off-topic: the charts show nothing about how the number of apps installed has changed
over time. B) is incorrect because Figure 2 shows that most people (51%) use either no apps (4%)
or 1-5 apps (47%) weekly. D) is off-topic as well: neither chart includes information about social
networks. So that again leaves C),

Question #2: This question is far easier than it might initially seem. In fact, you can determine
the answer from the titles of the charts alone. Nuniber of apps = quantity (Figure 1); at least once a
week = frequency of use (Figure 2). If you can make those relationships, you can jump directly to
the correct answer, B).

312

--- PAGE 312 ---
The passage and the graph are in agreement that
in the twenty-first century, nuclear power will

A)
B)
C)
D)

To Synthesize...Or Not
Now that we’ve looked at bunch of graphics-only questions, we’re going to add in a passage.

As discussed earlier in this chapter, questions that refer to both the graphic and the passage
come in two varieties. The first type requires you to take both sources into account. These
questions tend to be the most difficult, but there is also no “trick” to them. They simply tell you
what information to obtain to answer the question.

The other type refers to both sources but can actually be answered using only one source. You
can check the other source for confirmation, but you don’t necessarily need to do so. Let's start
with a relatively straightforward question of this type.

We're going to come back to this graph:

World Energy Consumption 1900-2025

rere, ten attra ands

a

asncrasionrinivndensssainrpuiriininiaatrnpirecruteiesdomar atest ascainineatatetssniarmts natin etnies rag g aeanennnats
=
ne

a Cael  . _

eee ee eee
Tae Sin near er rrr eA

\ aa ~ ~

A
Pp
3
s
>
4]
&
Fi
S
P=]
E
Ww
fi
3
o

~*-—Biofuel --"--Oil -~*—-Nuclear Power

constitute a significant source of energy.
lag behind other major energy sources.
eliminate the reliance on biofuel and oil.
allow for the creation of new technologies.

There’s a reason we're looking at this question without a passage - we don’t actually need one.
The question tells us that the passage and the question are in agreement, so if it’s true for one, it
must be true for the other. The question is so specific and the graph sufficiently basic that it
would be almost impossible to create answers true for the graph but not the passage.

So once again, what's the point of this graph? The use of nuclear power has been rising, and
nuclear power will provide a lot of energy in the 21% century. That's what A) says.

Now let's look at a graph paired with a passage.

313

--- PAGE 313 ---
10

15

20

25

30

35

This passage is adapted from Sharon Tregaskis, “What
Bees Teli Us About Global Climate Change,” © 2010
by Johns Hopkins Magazine.

Standing in the apiary on the grounds of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture’s Bee Research Laboratory
in Beltsville, Maryland, Wayne Esaias digs through the
canvas shoulder bag leaning against his leg in search of
the cable he uses to download data. It’s dusk as he runs
the cord from his laptop—precariously perched on the
beam of a cast-iron platform scale—to a small, battery-
operated data logger attached to the spring inside the
scale’s steel column. In the 1800s, a scale like this
would have weighed sacks of grain or crates of apples,
peaches, and melons, Since arriving at the USDA’s bee
lab in January 2007, this scale has been loaded with a
single item: a colony of Apis mellifera, the fuzzy,
black-and-yellow honey bee. An attached, 12-bit
recorder captures the hive’s weight to within a 10th of
a pound, along with a daily register of relative ambient
humidity and temperature.

On this late January afternoon, during a
comparatively balmy respite between the blizzards that
dumped several feet of snow on the Middle Atlantic
states, the bees, their honey, and the wooden boxes in
which they live weigh 94.5 pounds. In mid-July, as last
year’s unusually long nectar flow finally ebbed, the
whole contraption topped out at 275 pounds, including
nearly 150 pounds of honey. “Right now, the colony is
in a cluster about the size of a soccer ball,” says Esaias,
who’s kept bees for nearly two decades and knows
without lifting the lid what’s going on inside this hive.
“The center of the cluster is where the queen is, and
they’re keeping her at 93 degrees —the rest are just
hanging there, tensing their flight muscles to generate
heat.” Provided that they have enough calories to fuel
their winter workout, a healthy colony can survive as
far north as Anchorage, Alaska. “They slowly eat their
way up through the winter,” he says. “It’s a race: Will
they eat all their honey before the nectar flows, or not?”
To make sure their charges win that race, apiarists have
long relied on scale hives for vital management clues.
By tracking daily weight variations, a beekeeper can

40 discern when the colony needs a nutritional boost to

carry it through lean times, whether to add extra combs
for honey storage and even detect incursions by
marauding robber bees —all without disturbing the
colony. A graph of the hive’s weight— which can

314

45 increase by as much as 35 pounds a day in some
parts of the United States during peak nectar flow —
reveals the date on which the bees’ foraging was
most productive and provides a direct record of
successful pollination. “Around here, the bees make

50 their living in the month of May,” says Esaias, noting
that his bees often achieve daily spikes of 25 pounds,
the maximum in Maryland. “There’s almost no nectar
coming in for the rest of the year.” A scientist by
training and career oceanographer at NASA, Esaias

55 established the Mink Hollow Apiary in his Highland,

Maryland, backyard in 1992 with a trio of hand-me-

down hives and an antique platform scale much like

the one at the Beltsville bee lab. Ever since, he’s
maintained a meticulous record of the bees’ daily
weight, as well as weather patterns and such details

as his efforts to keep them healthy. In late 2006,

honey bees nationwide began disappearing in an

ongoing syndrome dubbed colony collapse disorder

(CCD). Entire hives went empty as bees inexplicably

abandoned their young and their honey. Commercial

beekeepers reported losses up to 90 percent, and the
large-scale farmers who rely on honey bees to ensure
rich harvests of almonds, apples, and sunflowers
became very, very nervous. Looking for clues, Esaias

76 turned to his own records. While the resulting graphs
threw no light on the cause of CCD, a staggering
trend emerged: In the span of just 15 seasons, the date
on which his Mink Hollow bees brought home the
most nectar had shifted by two weeks—from late May

75 to the middle of the month. “I was shocked when I
plotted this up,” he says. “It was right under my nose,
going on the whole time.” The epiphany would lead
Esaias to launch a series of research collaborations,
featuring honey bees and other pollinators, to

80 investigate the relationships among plants, pollinators,
and weather patterns. Already, the work has begun
to reveal insights into the often unintended
consequences of human interventions in natural and
agricultural ecosystems, and exposed significant

60

65

85 gaps in how we understand the effect climate change

will have on everything from food production to
terrestrial ecology.

--- PAGE 314 ---
5
4
i
4
‘
,
i

atgutstatoens

OR:

Data in the graph provide the most direct support
for which idea in the passage?

Which concept is supported by the passage and
by the information in the graph?

A)
B)
C)

D)

Peak Nectar Collection, 1992-2006

SON Obes ERE EARNS RA SOROS TNE Aa BIRT SN SRE BANNAN TREN SEE WhO? MURINE UE AOE ERENT AR A

31-May
21-May +
16-May ~

1992

Fi
i
q

[nae a ae
4
i

1996

a eee te ROE Cd as aN

199

|

1998 2000 2002 2004 2006

Human intervention in agriculture can have
unintended consequences.

Peak nectar collection now occurs earlier
than it did in recent years.

Bees that consume sufficient nutrients during
the winter can survive in northern regions.
Bees collect the largest amount of honey
during the month of May.

Let’s start by considering how the question is constructed. All of the answers restate points that
are mentioned in the passage, so you don’t need to look at the passage to check whether a
particular answer is present.

Your only job is to figure out which one of the points the graph supports. The simplest way to
do that is figure out the point of the graph. By definition, it must be the same point as the point
presented in the passage.

How do you figure out the point of the graph? Start by looking at the title and the data in each of
the axes. The title indicates the graph represents when peak nectar collection occurred (when the
highest amount of nectar was collected). The x-axis shows years, and the y-axis shows dates in
May, with high bars representing dates in late May and low bars representing dates in early
May.

The bars get progressively shorter, indicating that peak nectar collection occurred steadily earlier
in May between 1992 and 2006. That’s exactly what B) says.

315

--- PAGE 315 ---
The question could also be asked this way:

Do the data in the graph provide support for
Wayne Esaias’s claim that the time when his bees
were collecting the most nectar had shifted by two
weeks?

A) Yes, because the data provide evidence that
peak collection moved from late May to
mid-May.

B) Yes, because in each year, peak collection
occurred during the month of May.

C) No, because the graph indicates that peak
collection shifted from the beginning of June
to the beginning of May.

D) No, because peak collection time did not move
earlier in every two-year period.

Once again, the question itself states the claim you need to check, namely that Esaias claimed
that his bees were collecting the most honey two weeks earlier than they used to. As a result,
you do not need to consult the passage at all.

And once again, the easiest way to approach this question is to answer it for real upfront so that
you do not become confused by the answer choices.

As discussed before, the graph shows that peak nectar production declined from late May to
mid-May between 1992 and 2006. That’s a period of two weeks, so yes, the graph does support
Esaias’s claim. That makes A) the correct answer.

Note: Answer choices may sometimes include terminology that is slightly different from the
terminology used in the passage or the question. When this is the case, you must be able to
connect the original idea to the rephrased version. Here, for instance, the question refers to the
time when bees are “collecting the most nectar,” whereas the graph refers to “peak nectar
production.” It’s the same concept, just rephrased in the graph. The principle of “same idea,
different words” applies here too.

316

--- PAGE 316 ---
2
F
é
;
3
x

Now, we're going to look at a question that actually requires you to work with both a graph and
a passage. We're going to keep the same passage but use this graph:

i Percent of Crops Pollinated by Bees in the United States

| 120 CO ik torn em eterna name = MN NAT ENN name nr ew Vilna Ra eV Oren ae MRED EE RI ERAN
\ 100 +

i 80

60

s

0:

es

é sar scare names . saver pameererenmactter - ramen sary Lor amen vine agence ent tans ere

What purpose does the graph serve in relation to

2
£

| the passage as a whole? |
i A) It places the discussion of the bees’
; disappearance into a larger scientific context. i
‘ ‘ .

: B) It illustrates which crops are most affected by |
/ bees’ disappearance.

C) Itindicates which crops are most profitable to
cultivate in the bees’ absence.

D) It demonstrates the consequences of human
interference on bee populations.

Start by summing up what information the graph conveys: essentially, it shows how much
i pollination by bees various crops require. The high bars represent crops that are pollinated
primarily or even exclusively by bees, while the low bars represent crops that receive a far
lower percentage of their pollination from bees. How does that fit into the passage? Logically,
the crops that receive the highest percentage of their pollination from bees will be most affected
by the bees’ disappearance - which is exactly what B) says.

Let's look at another question:

‘
q
¥
zg
F
3

The information in the graph best supports which
idea in the passage?

A) Lines 9-11 (“In the 1800s...melons”)
B) Lines 44-49 (“A graph... pollination”)
\ C) Lines 65-69 (“Commercial ...nervous”)
' D) Lines 72-75 (“In...month”)

|

317

--- PAGE 317 ---
In this case, the line-reference construction of the answer choices leaves you no choice but to go
back to the passage; however, you still need to figure out some basic things beforehand.

First, we're going to take a moment and summarize the information presented in the graph.
Let's reiterate the main point: percent/bee poll. varies, but mostly very high/low.

How does the graph relate to the passage? The passage discusses the decline in the bee
population, and the graph shows the percentage of pollination from bees that each crop receives.

The graph thus allows us to make some reasonable inferences about how different crops would
be affected by the bees’ disappearance. Crops that received most of their pollination from bees
(high bars) would be strongly affected, while crops that received less of their pollination from
bees (low bars) would be less affected.

Now that we've figured out the basics, we're going to look at the answer choices:

A) In the 1800s, a scale like this would have weighed sacks of grain or crates of apples,
peaches, and melons.

Apples and peaches are included in the graph, but this answer is otherwise off-topic. The graph
shows the percent of each crop pollinated by bees; weight has nothing to do with that.

B) A graph of the hive’s weight — which can increase by as much as 35 pounds a day in
some parts of the United States during peak nectar flow — reveals the date on which the
bees’ foraging was most productive and provides a direct record of successful pollination.

Don’t be fooled by the word graph. This answer has the same problem as A): the lines are about
the relationship between weight and foraging, but the graph is about pollination.

C) Commercial beekeepers reported losses up to 90 percent, and the large-scale farmers who
rely on honey bees to ensure rich harvests of almonds, apples, and sunflowers became very,
very nervous.

The graph doesn’t depict losses, but it does depict almonds, apples, and sunflowers. In fact,
those are the crops that get the highest percentage of their pollination from bees (highest bars). It
follows logically that the bees’ disappearance would affect those crops the most severely,
making beekeepers nervous, So C) works.

D) In the span of just 15 seasons, the date on which his Mink Hollow bees brought home the
most nectar had shifted by two weeks—from late May to the middle of the month.

Once again, completely off-topic. The graph tells us absolutely nothing about dates, or when the
change in nectar production occurred.

So the answer is C).

318

--- PAGE 318 ---
[ onneettienteltieenh meiieninenaiaanianl

Alternately, you could be asked to use both the passage and the graph to make a small leap of
logic. For example, the question we just looked at could also be asked this way:

Percent of Crops Pollinated by Bees in the United States

|
Based on information in the passage and the graph, i
i

which crop is most likely to remain profitable for
large-scale farmers?

A) Peaches
B) Almonds
C) Oranges
D) Sunflowers

The passage indicates that large-scale farmers who grow almonds, apples, and sunflowers have
become very nervous (lines 68-69) as a result of declining bee populations. The graph supports
that statement by showing how dependent these crops are on bees for pollination. Logically, the
crops that are less dependent on bee pollination (=lower bars) will continue to grow more
normally and thus remain profitable. The bar for oranges is lowest, so C) is correct. Although
oranges are never mentioned in the passage, you can still make a reasonable inference.

Some questions may also ask you to infer the author’s probable attitude toward the graphic:

The author of the passage would most likely
consider the information in the graph to be

A) questionable data that could reasonably be
disputed.

B) intriguing but unsupported by personal
observations.

C) an accurate illustration of why some farmers
are concerned,

D) more accurate for some regions than for
others.

319

--- PAGE 319 ---
Which lines from the passage provide the best
evidence for the previous question?

A) Lines 49-50 (“Around.,,.May”)

Initially, it might look as if the answer could be anywhere. The question is very general, and
there are no line references. If you think carefully, though, you can narrow things down.

The title of the graph provides some very important information. It tells you that the graph is
about crops. Logically, then, the necessary section of the passage must relate to crops in some
way. Based on that information, the mention of “farmers” in C) and “some regions” in D)
suggests that the answer is located around one of those words/phrases, with C) the more likely
option. You don’t know for sure, of course, but these answers are worth checking first.

If you scan for the word farmers, you'll discover it appears in one place: line 67. And if you read
the entire sentence in which it appears, you'll see that large-scale farmers are particularly
concerned because they rely on almonds, apples, and sunflowers - exactly the crops that are
most dependent on bee pollination and thus most likely to be affected by the bees’
disappearance. So the answer is in fact C).

In another twist, this question could be paired with a supporting evidence question:

B) Lines 65-69 (““Commercial... nervous”) |
C) Lines 72-75 (“In... month”) |
D) Lines 81-84 (“Already...ecosystems”) |

The author of the passage would most likely

In this case, the process for answering Question #1 is similar. Although the paired structure
looks more complicated, it actually gives you some help by providing specific possibilities for
where the answer is located.

You still need to start by reiterating the big picture of the graph. If you know that it focuses on
specific crops, you can check each set of lines for references to crops. Then, simply plug the line
references into the first question, just as you would for any other supporting evidence pair:

consider the information in the graph to be

A) Lines 49-50 (“Around...May”)

B) Lines 65-69 (“Commercial...nervous”)
C) Lines 72-75 (“In...month”)

D) Lines 81-84 (“Already...ecosystems”)

When you get to B), the content overlap with the graph should be clear. Even if you don’t
immediately make the connection between the bars of the graph and the relative vulnerability of
various crops, the fact that both the graph and this section of the passage have the same focus
provides an important clue that B) is the correct answer.

320

--- PAGE 320 ---
What information, if presented in the graph, would
be most useful in developing the “insights” referred
to in line 82?

A)
B)
C)

D)

Graphics and Extended Reasoning

Like extended reasoning questions that accompany text-only passages, some graphic-based
questions may ask you to step beyond the words and images that appear in the passage/ graphic
and identify information that would support or provide a better understanding of a statement in
the passage.

For example, we’re going to come back to our original graph:

Peak Nectar Collection, 1992-2006

Se DUT opener erence re eemtre tenement sername

1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006

Hennes AEE hee eparamnabne pt essere BE HAE Rr te iy nage nin LA AALS A ENE ERHARD SARE

The types of pesticides used to treat crops
pollinated by bees.

Crop varieties pollinated by bees at different
times of the year.

Plant species from which bees collect the
greatest amount of nectar.

The average number of bees associated with a
hive between 1992 and 2006.

Start by defining the “insights” mentioned in line 82: Already, the work has begun to reveal insights
into the often unintended consequences of huntan interventions in natural and agricultural ecosystems
and exposed significant gaps in how we understand the effect climate change will have on everything front
food production to terrestrial ecology.

Based on this statement, you can infer that the correct answer must have something to do with
the unintended consequences of human interventions.

Now, look at the answers. Only one option is in any way related to human intervention in the
environment: A). Pesticides are created by humans, and information about which types are used
could help shed light on how they might inadvertently affect crop growth - that is, their
unintended consequences (lines 82-83). All of the other answers involve naturally occurring
phenomena unrelated to human intervention.

321

--- PAGE 321 ---
Graphics and Data Analysis Exercises

Note: Some of the graphs in this exercise refer to a passage when none is provided. This is a
deliberate strategy intended to reinforce the point that many questions can be answered using
the graph alone, even when the passage is mentioned in the question.

1.

Peak Hard Drive Capacity by Year

ee
oOo fM
}

Kilobytes /liter
ro

4 ope.
2 dedi ewe snes a tararr etch Nin Narr ea eHt AN AACE RAR SAAR a inns 2 NMnmanuanre rar ph ane Aannremmrwtnns*PinAT ne nktannrnemeuetV tn Te nnenan
| 0s iat Set nn La Meme SA RS eh i Wn ed Se ee |
8 © © © © © © »
Ne) Ne) S) S) SN) S .Y¥ y SS
a es OS

Note: P = Projected

According to the graph, which statement is true
about peak hard drive capacity in 2005?

A) It was double the peak hard drive capacity of
a decade earlier.

B) It was around one kilobyte/liter higher than it
had been five years earlier.

C) It was higher than peak hard drive capacity
in 2010.

D) It was nine kilobytes/liter lower than it was in
2010.

Which choice best summarizes the information
presented in the graph?

A) Hard drive capacity is expected to peak
sometime before 2020.

B) Peak hard drive capacity was slightly higher
in 2000 than in 1995.

C) Expanding peak hard drive capacity has led
to a large increase in computer sales.

D) Peak hard drive capacity has increased
dramatically since 1980.

osrericenmesennnnetynenetmemamaseneine nseremeremsimtusamasnseyhermmanansite ise Aer rem mm estsrete ere intraarea eee brrareen reruns stint remarry seh rete osmnieeteretttnv ni nrrnS eee PATTER PERRY

322

--- PAGE 322 ---
ae ete

Bea Rs ONIN ETE LANL PUGS LED DNY EAE ih 6

$1,500.00 ome

$900.00

$600.00
$300.00

Revenue in Millions

$0.00

According to the graph, which statement is true
about the amount of revenue from mobile phone
sales in 2008?

A) It was slightly higher than the amount of
revenue from PC sales in 2008.

B) It was similar to the amount of revenue from
PC sales in 2009.

C) It was similar to the amount of revenue from
mobile phone sales in 2009.

D) It was wildly out of proportion to the amount of

revenue from mobiles phone sales the previous

year.

Which information best summarizes the information

presented in the graph?

A) The gap between revenue from mobile phone
sales and PC sales has increased significantly.

B) Revenue from PC sales increased more rapidly
than did revenue from mobile phone sales.

C) Revenue from tablet sales may soon overtake
revenue from mobile phone sales.

D) Revenue from mobile phone sales has risen

steadily, while revenue from PC sales has
declined.

323

Global Mobile Phone vs. Desktop Computer Revenue

@ Mobile Phone
Revenue

ODesktop Computer
Revenue

Note: $1,200 = 1.2 billion

Data in the graph provide most direct support for
which idea in the passage?

A) People increasingly prefer mobile devices
for common tasks.

B) Consumers prefer to buy from companies
whose products are already familiar to them.

C) Mobile sales in new markets are substantially
higher than are mobile sales in established
markets.

D) Tablets can now perform many of the same
functions as mobile phones.

--- PAGE 323 ---
Figure 1

Daily Subway and Bus Use in Five Major Cities

1
st
a 0.75 -
o 0.5
— 0.25 @ Subway
& 0. B
é us
oy
Figure 2
Subway vs. Bus Ridership, New York City |
2.8 ge Om LY gh A RL YR NL Ln re ANinnAmmLansnLN tA asap ACA
gE 24 [ 7
po} 2 nanenriseveee Fanta are
Fs 16 @ Bus
2 08 Sub
: ubwa
£04 - ¥
Bor

1970

Information in figure | suggests that public
transportation users in London

A)
B)
C)
D)

take subways and buses at similar rates.
are unusually reliant on buses.
take at least one subway trip daily.

take subways at about the same rate as people
in New York.

Which of the following statements about bus use

in New York City is best supported by information
in figure 2?

A) It reached its highest point in 2010.

B) It was lower in 1980 than it was in 1990,
C) It began to rebound after 1990.

D) It declined in every decade.

324

Information in Figure | supports the author’s point
that buses are growing in popularity as a means of
urban transport by indicating that

A) many people around the world take at least one
bus trip every day.

bus ridership surpasses subway ridership in
some major cities.

B)
C) people in Tokyo make far more trips by bus
daily than they do trips by subway.

D) the number of bus trips taken by people in
major cities has substantially increased.

Taken together, the graphs suggest that public
transit users in New York City

A) use buses more often today than they did in
previous decades.
use buses about as often as they use the subway.

rely more heavily on buses than do public
transit users in other cities.

increasingly prefer to travel by subway.

B)
C)

D)

--- PAGE 324 ---
Ww

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

The following passage is adapted from Michael Anft,
“Solving the Mystery of Death Valley's Walking Rocks,”
© 2011 by Johns Hopkins Magazine,

For six decades, observers have been confounded
by the movement of large rocks across a dry lake bed
in California’s Death Valley National Park, Leaving
flat trails behind them, rocks that weigh up to 100
pounds seemingly do Michael Jackson’s moonwalk
across the valley’s sere, cracked surface, sometimes
traveling more than 100 yards. Without a body of water
to pick them up and move them, the rocks at Racetrack
Playa, a flat space between the valley’s high cliffs,
have been the subject of much speculation, including
whether they have been relocated by human pranksters
or space aliens. The rocks have become the desert
equivalent of Midwestern crop circles. “They really are
a curiosity,” says Ralph Lorenz, a planetary scientist at
the Applied Physics Laboratory. “Some [people] have
mentioned UFOs. But I’ve always believed that this is
something science could solve.”

It has tried. One theory holds that the rocks are
blown along by powerful winds. Another posits that
the wind pushes thin sheets of ice, created when the
desert’s temperatures dip low enough to freeze water
from a rare rainstorm, and the rocks go along for the
ride. But neither theory is rock solid. Winds at the playa
aren’t strong enough—some scientists believe that
they’d have to be 100 miles per hour or more—to blow
the rocks across the valley. And rocks subject to the
“ice sailing theory” wouldn’t create trails as they
moved.

Lorenz and a team of investigators believe that a
combination of forces may work to rearrange
Racetrack Playa’s rocks. “We saw that it would take a
lot of wind to move these rocks, which are larger than
you’d expect wind to move,” Lorenz explains. “That
led us to this idea that ice might be picking up the
rocks and floating them.” As they explained in the
January issue of The American Journal of Physics,
instead of moving along with wind-driven sheets of
ice, the rocks may instead be lifted by the ice, making
them more subject to the wind’s force. The key, Lorenz
says, is that the lifting by an “ice collar’ reduces
friction with the ground, to the point that the wind now
has enough force to move the rock. The rock moves,
the ice doesn’t, and because part of the rock juts
through the ice, it marks the territory it has covered.
Lorenz’s team came to its conclusion through a
combination of intuition, lab work, and observation—
not that the last part was easy. Watching the rocks
travel is a bit like witnessing the rusting of a hubcap.
Instances of movement are rare and fast for only a few

325

50 seconds. Lorenz’s team placed low-resolution cameras
on the cliffs (which are about 30 miles from the nearest
paved road) to take pictures once per hour. For the past
three winters, the researchers have weathered extreme
temperatures and several flat tires to measure how

55 often the thermometer dips below freezing, how often
the playa gets rain and floods, and the strength of the
winds. “The measurements seem to back up our
hypothesis,” he says. “Any of the theories may be true
at any one time, but ice rafting may be the best explan-

60 ation for the trails we’ve been seeing. We’ ve seen trails
like this documented in Arctic coastal areas, and the
mechanism is somewhat similar. A belt of ice sur-
rounds a boulder during high tide, picks it up, and then
drops it elsewhere.” His “ice raft theory” was also

65 borne out by an experiment that used the ingenuity of a
high school science fair. Lorenz placed a basalt pebble
in a Tupperware container with water so that the
pebble projected just above the surface. He then turned
the container upside down in a baking tray filled with a

70 layer of coarse sand at its base, and put the whole thing
in his home freezer, The rock’s “keel” (its protruding
part) projected downward into the sand, which simu-
lated the cracked surface of the playa (which scientists
call “Special K” because of its resemblance to cereal

75 flakes). A gentle push or slight puff of air caused the
Tupperware container to move, just as an ice raft
would under the right conditions. The pebble made a
trail in the soft sand. “It was primitive but effective,”
Lorenz says of the experiment. Lorenz has spent the

80 last 20 years studying Titan, a moon of Saturn, He says
that Racetrack Playa’s surface mirrors that of a dried
lakebed on Titan. Observations and experiments on
Earth may yield clues to that moon’s geology. “We
also may get some idea of how climate affects

85 geology—particularly as the climate changes here on
Earth,” Lorenz says. “When we study other planets and
their moons, we’re forced to use Occam’s razor —
sometimes the simplest answer is best, which means
you look to Earth for some answers. Once you get out

90 there on Earth, you realize how strange so much of its
surface is. So, you have to figure there’s weird stuff to
be found on Titan as well,” Whether that’s true or not
will take much more investigation. He adds: “One day,
we'll figure all this out. For the moment, the moving

95 rock present a wonderful problem to study ina
beautiful place.”

--- PAGE 325 ---
Racetrack Playa Average vs. Maximum Wind Speed

Average Wind Speed

(miles/hour)

Peak Wind Speed
(miles/hour)

20
19 7

January
February

=
| December _| 21
[January [20
[February | 22

—————s

| March _| 24

According to the graph, which statement is true
about wind speeds at Racketrack Playa in 2009?

|

A)
B)
C)

D)

Peak wind speeds increased during every
month between November and March.
Average wind speeds increased during every
month between November and March.
Average wind speed in February was
substantially higher than it was in December.

The lowest peak wind speed occurred in
November.

Which choice is best supported by the information
in the chart?

A)
B)
C)

D)

Peak wind speeds in 2009 were higher in
every month than they were in 2008.
Average wind speeds in some months
exceeded peak wind speeds in others.
The windiest months at Racetrack Playa
were February and March.

Peak wind speed in February 2009 was higher

than peak wind speed in February 2008.

326

Which of the following statements from the passage
is represented by the chart?

A) Lines 16-17 (“But...solve”)

B) Lines 23-26 (“Winds...valley’)
C) Lines 39-42 (“The key...rock”)
D) Lines 58-60 (“Any...seeing’’)

--- PAGE 326 ---
'
;
}
3
i
:
¥
2
&
f
5

PEEPLES POL Ee SETAE NUNES EGY

4

5. The following passage is adapted from “Makerspaces,
Hackerspaces, and Community Scale Production in
Detroit and Beyond,” © 2013 by Sean Ansanelli.

During the mid-1980s, spaces began to emerge
across Europe where computer hackers could convene
for mutual support and camaraderie. In the past few
years, the idea of fostering such shared, physical spaces

5 has been rapidly adapted by the diverse and growing
community of “makers,” who seek to apply the idea of
“hacking” to physical objects, processes, or anything
else that can be deciphered and improved upon.

A hackerspace is described by hackerspaces.org as

10 a “community-operated physical space where people
with common interests, often in computers, technology,
science, digital art or electronic art, can meet, socialize,
and/or collaborate.” Such spaces can vary in size,
available technology, and membership structure (some

15 being completely open), but generally share community-
oriented characteristics. Indeed, while the term
“hacker” can sometimes have negative connotations,
modern hackerspaces thrive off of community,
openness, and assimilating diverse viewpoints — these

20 often being the only guiding principles in otherwise
informal organizational structures.

In recent years, the city of Detroit has emerged
as a hotbed for hackerspaces and other DIY
(“Do-It-Y ourself”) experiments. Several hackerspaces

25 can already be found throughout the city and several
more are currently in formation. Of course, Detroit’s
attractiveness for such projects can be partially
attributed to cheap real estate, which allows aspiring
hackers to acquire ample space for experimentation.

30 Some observers have also described this kind of making
and tinkering as embedded in the DNA of Detroit’s
residents, who are able to harness substantial
intergenerational knowledge and attract like-minded
individuals.

35 _Hackerspaces (or “makerspaces”) can be found in
more commercial forms, but the vast majority of spaces
are self-organized and not-for-profit. For example, the
OmniCorp hackerspace operates off member fees to
cover rent and new equipment, from laser cutters to

40 welding tools, OmniCorp also hosts an “open hack
night” every Thursday in which the space is open to
the general public. Potential members are required to
attend at least one open hack night prior to a consensus
vote by the existing members for admittance; no

45 prospective members have yet been denied.

A visit to one of OmniCorp’s open hack nights
reveals the vast variety of activity and energy existing
in the space. In the main common room alone, activities
range from experimenting with sound installations and

327

50 learning to program Arduino boards to building
speculative “oloid” shapes — all just for the sake of it.
With a general atmosphere of mutual support,
participants in the space are continually encouraged
to help others.

55 One of the most active community-focused initiatives
in the city is the Mt. Elliot Makerspace. Jeff Sturges,
former MIT Media Lab Fellow and Co-Founder of
OmniCorp, started the Mt. Elliot project with the aim of
replicating MIT’s Fab Lab model on a smaller, cheaper

60 scale in Detroit. “Fab Labs” are production facilities that
consist of a small collection of flexible computer-
controlled tools that cover several different scales and
various materials, with the aim to make “almost
anything” (including other machines). The Mt. Elliot

65 Makerspace now offers youth-based skill development
programs in eight areas: Transportation, Electronics,
Digital Tools, Wearables, Design and Fabrication, Food,
Music, and Arts. The range of activities is meant to
provide not only something for everyone, but a well-

70 rounded base knowledge of making to all participants.

While the center receives some foundational support,
the space also derives significant support from the local
community. Makerspaces throughout the city connect
the space’s youth-based programming directly to

75 school curriculums.

The growing interest in and development of
hacker/makerspaces has been explained, in part, as a
result of the growing maker movement. Through the
combination of cultural norms and communication

80 channels from open source production as well as
increasingly available technologies for physical
production, amateur maker communities have developed
in virtual and physical spaces.

Publications such as Wired are noticing the

85 transformative potential of this emerging movement
and have sought to devote significant attention to its
development. Chief editor Chris Anderson recently
published a book entitled Makers, in which he proclaims
that the movement will become the next Industrial

90 Revolution. Anderson argues such developments will
allow for a new wave of business opportunities by
providing mass-customization rather than mass-
production.

The transformative potential of these trends goes

95 beyond new business opportunities or competitive
advantages for economic growth. Rather, these trends
demonstrate the potential to actually transform
economic development models entirely.

--- PAGE 327 ---
Makerspaces in Selected U.S. Cities, 2011 vs. 2014

Seattle
Austin
St. Paul (Minn.) |
Detroit
Boston |
San Francisco jas

2014 @2011

According to the graph, which statement is true
about the number of makerspaces in Austin in 2014?

ra)

Which of the following statements from the passage
is supported by information in the graph?

A) It was smailer than the number of makerspaces
in Detroit in 2014.

B) It was almost half the number of makerspaces
in San Francisco the same year.

C) It was the same as the number of makerspaces
in Austin in 2011.

D) It lagged behind the number of makerspaces
in Boston in 2014.

A) Lines 3-6 (“In... makers”)

B) Lines 26-29 (“Of...experimentation”)

C) Lines 71-73 (“While...community”)

D) Lines 94-96 (“The transformative... growth”)

The author of the passage would most likely
regard the graph with

A) enthusiasm, because it demonstrates that
makerspaces can revolutionize the United
States economy.

B) skepticism, because it show a relatively small
number of makerspaces in Detroit.

C) approval, because it indicates that the
makerspace movement has grown across the
United States.

D) hostility, because it reveals that San Francisco
has the greatest number of makerspaces.

mene rermemenrntnuusanreeermenimann gripe nutri teesuaepuryerttitternrtnamanniny Hitt fninraemantnenet the eer nanan ist sherreneeensinstsiictHteeenimenainettherettnenenanesnytithet—tHihnemieetemneetit ttt renters tint nen

328

--- PAGE 328 ---
VEAL CANIM RONEN EAA pt Set

i
§
i

ERE oop feet tue AS AA TREO OT

6.

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

The following passage is adapted from Julian Jackson,
“New Research Suggests Dinosaurs Were Warm-Blooded
and Active” © 2011 by Julian Jackson.

New research from the University of Adelaide has
added to the debate about whether dinosaurs were cold-
blooded and sluggish or warm-blooded and active.
Professor Roger Seymour from the University's School
of Earth & Environmental Sciences has applied the
latest theories of human and animal anatomy and
physiology to provide insight into the lives of
dinosaurs.

Human thigh bones have tiny holes ~ known as the
“nutrient foramen” — on the shaft that supply blood to
living bone cells inside. New research has shown that
the size of those holes is related to the maximum rate
that a person can be active during aerobic exercise.
Professor Seymour has used this principle to evaluate
the activity levels of dinosaurs.

“Far from being lifeless, bone cells have a relatively
high metabolic rate and they therefore require a large
blood supply to deliver oxygen. On the inside of the
bone, the blood supply comes usually from a single
artery and vein that pass through a hole on the shaft —
the nutrient foramen,” he says.

Professor Seymour wondered whether the size of
the nutrient foramen might indicate how much blood
was necessary to keep the bones in good repair. For
example, highly active animals might cause more bone
‘microfractures,’ requiring more frequent repairs by the
bone cells and therefore a greater blood supply. “My
aim was to see whether we could use fossil bones of
dinosaurs to indicate the level of bone metabolic rate
and possibly extend it to the whole body's metabolic
rate,” he says. “One of the big controversies among
paleobiologists is whether dinosaurs were cold-blooded
and sluggish or warm-blooded and active. Could the
size of the foramen be a possible gauge for dinosaur
metabolic rate?”

Comparisons were made with the sizes of the holes
in living mammals and reptiles, and their metabolic
rates, Measuring mammals ranging from mice to
elephants, and reptiles from lizards to crocodiles, one
of Professor Seymour's Honors students, Sarah Smith,
combed the collections of Australian museums,
photographing and measuring hundreds of tiny holes in
thigh bones.

“The results were unequivocal. The sizes of the holes
were related closely to the maximum metabolic rates
during peak movement in mammals and reptiles,”
Professor Seymour says. “The holes found in mammals
were about 10 times larger than those in reptiles.”

329

These holes were compared to those of fossil!

50 dinosaurs. Dr. Don Henderson, Curator of
Dinosaurs from the Royal Tyrrell Museum in
Alberta, Canada, and Daniela Schwarz-Wings from
the Museum fiir Naturkunde Humboidt University
Berlin, Germany measured the holes in 10 species of

55 dinosaurs from five different groups, including
bipedal and quadrupedal carnivores and herbivores,
weighing 50kg to 20,000kg.

“On a relative comparison to eliminate the
differences in body size, all of the dinosaurs had

60 holes in their thigh bones larger than those of
mammals,” Professor Seymour says.

“The dinosaurs appeared to be even more active
than the mammals. We certainly didn't expect to see
that. These results provide additional weight to

65 theories that dinosaurs were warm-blooded and
highly active creatures, rather than cold-blooded
and sluggish.”

Professor Seymour says following the results of
this study, it’s likely that a simple measurement of

70 foramen size could be used to evaluate maximum
activity levels in other vertebrate animals.

--- PAGE 329 ---
Blood Flow Index Q, (mm*)

10°
10"
10°
10°
10°
10°

-6
10
* Dinosaurs
* Mammals
« Reptiles

10”

-B a
10 1g 10g

100g

1kg 10kg 100kg ‘it 10t 100t

Seymour et al 2011

Which statement is best supported by data in the
graph?

A) Light reptiles have higher blood flow than
heavier reptiles.

B) Heavy mammals have lower bload flow than
heavy reptiles.

C) Blood flow in the heaviest mammals is slightly
higher than in light dinosaurs.

D) Blood flow is fairly uniform in dinosaurs
at a wide range of weights.

The author of the passage would most likely
consider the information in the graph to be

A) acompelling piece of evidence in support of
Professor Seymour’s theory.

B) a potentially interesting but premature
finding.

C) conclusive proof that dinosaurs were active
and warm-blooded.

D) suggestive of a point of view towards which
the author is skeptical.

330

Do the data in the table provide support for
Professor Seymour's claim that dinosaurs were
warm-blooded and highly active?

A) Yes, because they indicate that dinosaurs
had foramens larger than the foramens of the
largest mammals.

B) Yes, because they suggest that dinosaurs had
even higher metabolic rates than animals known
to be warm-blooded.

C) No, because they show that dinosaurs had lower
blood flow than reptiles.

D) No, because they reveal only minimal changes
in metabolic rate between smal! and large
dinosaurs.

--- PAGE 330 ---
Explanations: Graphics and Data Analysis Exercises

1.1B

B) is correct because the point for 2005 indicates that peak hard drive capacity was approximately

9 kilobytes/liter, Even though that number does not appear on the graph, you can infer that this is
the case because 8 and 10 do appear, and the point for 2005 is situated between them. If you look back
to 2000, you can see that the graph indicates a peak capacity of 8 kilobytes/liter, or one less than in
2005, Note that this question can be tricky if you forget that each line on the graph represents tivo
kilobytes/liter. A point halfway between two lines therefore equals one kilobyte/ liter.

A) is incorrect because peak hard drive capacity in 1995 (a decade earlier) was 7 - only 2 kilobytes
less, not half (that would be 4). C) is incorrect because peak hard drive capacity in 2010 was higher
than in 2005; you can tell just by looking at the graph. D) is incorrect for the same reason as C) - don’t
get thrown off by the mention of the number nine. In this case, it indicates the peak hard drive
capacity was 9 kilobytes/liter, not that it was 9 kilobytes/ liter Jess.

1.2D

Remember that this question is asking you to summarize the graph, not just to identify which
statement it supports. The point of the graph is that peak hard drive capacity has increased
enormously since 1980 and is predicted to continue increasing. Based on that information alone, you
should be able to identify D) as the answer.

Playing process of elimination, A) is incorrect because the graph indicates that peak hard drive
capacity will keep increasing through 2020; it will not peak before then. For B), it is true that the peak
hard drive capacity was slightly higher in 2000 than in 1995, but that statement only describes a small
portion of the graph, and the question asks for the big picture. C) is incorrect because the graph
provides no information at all about computer sales; this answer is beyond the bounds of what can be
inferred,

2.1C

If you look at the graph as a whole, you should notice that mobile phone revenue has gone up very
substantially, whereas PC revenue has been much lower and has grown much more slowly.
Furthermore, mobile phone revenue has been consistently much higher than PC revenue. Using that
information, you can assume both A) and B) are wrong - at no point was mobile phone revenue only
slightly higher than PC revenue, nor was it ever similar to PC revenue. In D), the phrase “wildly out
of proportion” should also give you pause. Indeed the graph indicates that mobile phone revenue
leveled off beginning in 2007. In 2008 (the tick mark between 2007 and 2009), it was only marginally
higher than in 2007. That leaves C), which is correct: the mobile phone bars for 2008 and 2009 are
almost the same.

2.2.A

Take a moment to reiterate the point of the graph: mobile phone revenue has gone way up, whereas
PC revenue has increased much more slowly and stayed far below mobile phone revenue. By the
most recent year indicated in the graph, the PC bars are only about a quarter as high as the mobile
phone bars. In contrast, they are half as high during the first year plotted on the graph. That indicates
a larger gap between mobile phone and PC sales, making A) correct. B) is incorrect because the graph
indicates the opposite: revenue from PC sales increased more slowly than revenue from mobile
phone sales. C) is incorrect because the graph shows nothing about tablets. D) is incorrect because PC
revenue did not decline - it merely increased less than mobile phone revenue did.

331

--- PAGE 331 ---
2.3 A

Forget about the reference to the passage that isn’t there - the question is really asking what the
graph shows, ie., its “point.” What is that point? That mobile phone revenue is increasingly
outstripping desktop computer revenue. What does that suggest? That mobile phones have become
much, much more popular than desktop computers. Which answer is most consistent with that idea?
A). Even though that answer does not mention anything about desktop computers, it is still generally
consistent with the graph - if people increasingly prefer mobile “devices” (note the slight change of
terminology from the graph) for “numerous common tasks,” then revenue from sales of mobile
devices would logically increase as well (and implicitly, sales of desktop computers, which were
previously used for those tasks, would go down). B) is incorrect because the graph provides no
information about companies, familiar to consumers or not. C) is incorrect because the graph likewise
provides no information about established vs. un-established markets. D) is incorrect because the
graph provides information about mobile phones only, not mobile devices in general. Note how this
is different from A): correct answers may phrase information from the graph in a more general way
(“mobile phones” in the graph vs. “mobile devices” in the correct answer), but they cannot replace
specific information from a graph with something equally specific (e.g., tablets).

3.1B

When you look at the bar for London on the graph, there are two things to notice: one is that the bar
for buses is much higher than the bar for subways, and the other is that the bar for buses is higher
than it is in any other city. That indicates that people in London take buses at a higher rate than
people in other cities. In other words, they are “unusually reliant on buses.” The answer is therefore
B). A) is incorrect because, as stated, the bar for buses is much higher than that for subways. C) is
incorrect because the graph indicates just over .25 trips/person daily. (Remember that the bars
represent increments of .25, not one). D) is incorrect because the bar for subway use in New York is
much higher than the bar for subway use in London.

3.2C

Start by making sure that you're looking only at the top part of the bar (light gray), which shows bus
use, not at the entire bar, which shows both bus and subway use. If you consider the graph as a
whole, you can notice that the “bus” bars get smaller and then larger again. The correct answer is
related to that fact. C) correctly states that bus use began to rebound (become larger) after 1990,
which is precisely what the graph shows - there is a big leap from 1990 to 2000. A) is incorrect
because the graph indicates that bus use was higher in 1970 than in 2010, B) is incorrect because the
bar for bus use in 1990 is clearly smaller than the bar for 1980. D) is incorrect because bus use only
declined until 1990, after which it began to increase,

3.3 B

This question is fairly complex, so start by simplifying it. First, don’t get distracted by the reference to
the (non-existent) passage. The question is only telling you that the graph supports a point in the
passage, and that the point in the passage will be the point of the graph. So the question is really only
asking you to determine the point of the graph. What is the point of the graph? Bus use is more
common in some cities, and subway use is more common in others. That is consistent with B), which
is the answer. If you think about the question carefully, that makes sense: the fact that people in some
cities use buses more heavily than subways would indeed support the idea that buses are growing in
popularity. A} is incorrect because the graph does not indicate that people take more than one bus
trip per day in any city - remember that each bar represents .25 trips, not one. C) is incorrect because
it states the opposite of what the graph shows - people in Tokyo take far more subway trips than bus
trips. D) is incorrect because the graph indicates nothing about whether bus trips have increased or
not ~ it only gives us a snapshot of how many trips people take on average at one point in time.

332

--- PAGE 332 ---
3.4D

The question is essentially telling you that the graphs depict similar phenomena, so start by figuring
out what one graph reveals, then use the other graph to confirm that idea. If you look at Figure 1, you
can see that subway ridership is a lot higher than bus ridership, so the correct answer must be related
to that idea. That is essentially what D) says, so you can assume that it is right. If you look at Figure 2,
you'll see that subway use has risen significantly since 1990, indicating that people in New York
increasingly prefer the subway. A) is incorrect because the graph shows the opposite - bus use has
declined, suggesting that preference for it has declined; B) is incorrect because the graphs show that
subway use is much higher than bus use. C) is incorrect because Figure 1 shows that bus use is higher
in London and Singapore than in New York. Figure 2 also shows nothing about bus use in cities other
than New York.

4.1D

A) is incorrect because peak wind speed was lower in March than in February (89 vs. 90). B) is
incorrect because average wind speed was higher in December than in January (21 vs. 20). C) is
incorrect because average wind speed in February was only 1 mph higher than in December (22 vs.
21), not substantially higher. D) is correct because 69 mph is the lowest peak wind speed provided for
any month in 2009.

4.2C

Unlike a graph, from which you can get a very quick overview of a situation, a chart isn’t nearly as
easy to get the big picture from. For that reason, you are better off working through the answers one
by one rather than trying to get an overview of the chart as a whole. A) can be eliminated easily if
you start from November and compare peak wind speeds in 2008 to those in 2009: peak speed in
December 2008 was higher than in December 2009. B) is phrased in a general way, but that answer
can be eliminated easily as well: all of the values for average speed are clearly far below all of the
values for peak speed. C) is correct because the values for both average and peak wind speeds are
higher than they are in any other month. D) is incorrect because peak wind speed in February 2009
(90) was lower than peak wind speed in February 2008 (92).

4.3B

Before you start hunting through the passage, figure out what sort of statement you're looking for.
The chart indicates various wind speeds, so the correct section of the passage must focus on wind
speeds as well. A) is off-topic ~ those lines have nothing to do with wind speeds, B) is correct because
those lines indicate that the winds at Racetrack Playa would have needed to blow more than 100 mph
to move the rocks, and the chart indicates that their highest speed was 92 mph. Be careful with C) -
lines 39-40 do refer to the wind, but the chart shows nothing about “ice collars” or rock movement.

D) is likewise incorrect because the chart reveals nothing directly about ice rafting, only wind speed.

5.1B

This is a straightforward detail question, so you don’t need to worry about the point of the graph. A)
is incorrect because there were more makerspaces in Austin in 2014 than in Detroit the same year. Be
careful not to get confused by the fact that there were fewer makerspaces in Austin in 2011 than in
Detroit in 2014. B) is correct because the number of makerspaces is Austin in 2014 was just under 40,
while the number in San Francisco was 80 - that’s almost half. C) is incorrect because the number of
makerspaces in Austin grew from 2011 to 2014. D) is incorrect because the 2014 bar for Austin is
longer than the 2014 bar for Boston.

333

--- PAGE 333 ---
5.2C

What is the point of the graph? Basically, that there were far more makerspaces in various U.S. cities
in 2014 than in 2011. What is the point of the passage? That makerspaces are a major, growing
phenomenon that could transform the economy. Would the author's attitude toward the graph be
positive or negative? Positive. Eliminate B) and D). Now, look at A) and C). Be very careful with A).
The author does state that makerspaces will revolutionize the economy, but the graph provides no
information whatsoever about the economy. A) can thus be eliminated, leaving C). The author would
likely approve of the fact that makerspaces are proliferating so rapidly across the United States.

5.3A

If you keep the point of the passage in mind, this question is fairly straightforward. You're looking
for the lines that indicate that makerspaces are sprouting up all over the place. That’s big-picture
information, so the answer is probably located at the beginning or the end of the passage. A) or D) are
thus most likely to be correct. If you work in order, you'll hit the answer quickly: lines 3-6 state that
the idea of fostering such shared, physical spaces has been rapidly adapted by the diverse and growing
conmmunity of “makers,” which corresponds to the growth of makerspaces depicted in the graph.

6.1D

Since the question is phrased so generally, you can assume that the answer will be related to the point
of the graph. The graph has a lot going on, but if you had to pick out the most important information,
it would probably have something to do with the fact that dinosaurs are way up at the top (indicating
very high blood flow), above both mammals and reptiles. Keeping that in mind, you can check the
answers. A) is incorrect because the relationship between weight and blood flow is linear - heavy
reptiles have higher blood flow than light reptiles. B) is incorrect because the line for heavy mammals
is clearly well above the line for heavy reptiles. You can use the point to eliminate C) - all of the
dinosaurs are heavier than even the heaviest mammals. D) is correct because the graph indicates that
blood flow is similarly high (=relatively uniform) in dinosaurs at weights ranging from 1 kilogram to
10 tons.

6.2A

What does the author think? He has a pretty positive attitude toward Professor Seymour's theory -
the passage indicates that there’s a fair amount of evidence to suggest it’s accurate. What is that
theory? That dinosaurs were warm-blooded and active, as indicated by their high maximum blood
flow (i.e., their metabolic rate). What does the graph show? That dinosaurs had extremely high blood
flow, indicating extremely high metabolism. So logically, the author would have a positive attitude
toward the graph. That eliminates B) and D). Now consider A) and C). The wording of C) should
make you immediately suspicious; a single graph isn’t enough to “conclusively prove” anything. The
graph does, however, provide excellent “support” for Seymour's theory, making A) correct.

6.3 B

Although the question alludes to the passage, you don’t actually need it. The question itself tells you
the relevant piece of information: Professor Seymour claims that dinosaurs are warm-blooded and
active. Your only job is to determine whether the graph supports that claim. What does the graph
show? That dinosaurs had extremely high blood flow, which is consistent with Professor Seymour's
theory (high maximum blood flow = high metabolic rate = warm-bloodedness). That eliminates C)
and D). A) can also be eliminated because the graph provides no information about foramen size,
leaving B). That answer is correct because the graph indicates that blood flow is higher in all
dinosaurs than in even the heaviest mammals, which are known to be warm-blooded.

334

--- PAGE 334 ---
Test

Appendix A: 2018 Official Guide Questions by Category

Question #

Vocabulary in Context

Test 1
Test 1
Test 1
Test 1
Test 1
Test 1
Test 1

Test 2
Test 2
Test 2
Test 2
Test 2
Test 2
Test 2

Test 3
Test 3
Test 3
Test 3
Test 3
Test 3
Test 3
Test 3
Test3

Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4

Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5

3
8
12
18
40
45
48

14
16
25
37
39
43
47

2
6
16
17
22
28
31
35
47

3
9
10
13
18
24
33
34

10
14
15
22
29
37
38
44
47

335

Test 6
Test 6

Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6

Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7

Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8

2
14

18
26
35
37
44

10
15
18
31
32
35
49

8
12
13
25
27
35
38
49

The Big Picture

Test 1
Test 1
Test 1

Test 2
Test 2
Test 2
Test 2

Test 3
Test 3
Test 3

Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4

Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5

1
32
33

1
11
29
33

1
14
48

11
22
41
42

8
11
16
17

Summary of a passage
Purpose of a passage
Main point

Summary

Purpose of a passage
Purpose of a passage
Main point

Suminary
Point of a paragraph
Purpose of a paragraph

Summary of a paragraph
Purpose of a passage
Purpose of a passage
Purpose of a passage

Main idea of paragraph
Point of a passage
Central claim

Point of a passage

--- PAGE 335 ---
Test 6 11 Purpose of a passage
Test 6 22 Purpose of a passage
Test 6 40 Purpose of a passage
Test 7 1 Passage theme

Test 7 11 Purpose of a passage
Test 7 22 Purpose of a passage
Test 7 29 Main idea of a paragraph
Test 8 22 Central idea of a passage
Test 8 42 Purpose of a passage

Non-Paired “Support/Contradict” Questions

Test 1 23
Test 2 17
Test 3 18
Test 4 49
Test 5 9

Test 5 35
Test 6 4

Test 8 24

Literal Comprehension

Test 1 4 No line reference
Test 1 5 Evidence

Test 1 9 No line reference
Test 1 18 No line reference
Test 1 14 Evidence

Test 1 16 Line reference |
Test 1 17 Evidence

Test 1 24 Line reference
Test 1 36 No line reference
Test 1 37 Evidence

Test 1 38 Line reference
Test 1 39 Evidence

Test 1 43 No line reference
Test1 44 Evidence

Test 1 50 Line reference
Test 1 51 Evidence

Test 2 5 No line reference
Test 2 6 No line reference
Test 2 7 Evidence

Test 2 9 No line reference
Test 2 10 Evidence

Test 2 22 No line reference
Test 2 23 Evidence

336

Test 2
Test 2
Test 2
Test 2
Test 2
Test 2

Test 3
Test 3
Test 3
Test 3
Test3
Test 3
Test 3
Test 3

Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4

Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5

Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6

No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
Line reference
No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
No line reference
Evidence

Line reference

No line reference
No line reference
No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
No line reference
No line reference
No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
No line reference
Evidence

Line reference
Evidence

No line reference

No line reference
Evidence
No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
Evidence
No line reference
Evidence

Line reference
Evidence

No line reference
Evidence

No line reference

--- PAGE 336 ---
i
i

Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7

Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7

Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8

inference

Test 1
Test 1
Testi

Test 2
Test 2
Test 2
Test 2

Test 3
Test3
Test 3
Test 3
Test 3
Test 3
Test 3
Test 3
Test 3
Test 3
Test 3
Test 3
Test 3

1
21
26

26
38
48
49

bo

23
29
30
32
33
43
44
45
46
49

Evidence
No line reference
Evidence
No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
Evidence
No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
Evidence
No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
Evidence
No line reference
Evidence

Attitude
Main point

No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
Evidence

Assumption

No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
Evidence

Line reference
Evidence

No line reference
Evidence
Assumption

337

Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4

Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5
Test 5

Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6

Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7

Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8

8
16
17
25
26
31
35
48

3

13
33
34
50
51

7
8
24
30
45
46

24
25
27
28
33
34
36
37
44
45

5
6
33
34

No line reference
Evidence
No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
Evidence
No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
Evidence
No line reference
Evidence
No line reference
Evidence
No line reference
Evidence
No line reference
Evidence

No line reference
Evidence
No line reference
Evidence

Extended Reasoning/Analogy

Test 5

Test 7
Test 7

Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8

36

21
52

3
16
36
50

Analogy

--- PAGE 337 ---
Function/Purpose

Test 1
Test 1
Test 1
Test 1
Test 1
Test 1
Test 1
Test I

Test 2
Test 2
Test 2
Test 2
Test 2
Test 2
Test 2
Test 2

Test 3
Test 3
Test 3

Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4

Test 5
Test 5
Test 5

Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6
Test 6

Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7

19
22
25
27
32
34
42
46

2

4

8
11
15
28

29
34

5
11
25

4
22
30
41
42
45

2
48
52

338

Test 7
Test 7
Test 7
Test 7

Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8
Test 8

Tone and Attitude

Test 1
Test 1

Test 3

Test 4
Test 4
Test 4
Test 4

Test 5
Test 5

Test 7
Test 7

Test 8

23
26
30
43

2
9
11
18
32
41
42
46

6
15

42

1
2
19
23

24
25

16
17

45

Attitude
Attitude

Tone

No line reference
Evidence
Graphic

Attitude

Attitude/ Line reference
Evidence

Attitude/Line reference
Evidence

Tone

Rhetorical Strategy and Passage Organization

Test 1
Test 1

Test 2
Test 2

Test 3
Test 4
Test 4
Test 5
Test 6

Test 7
Test 7
Test 7

Test 8
Test 8

2
34

3
12

21
43
44
32
43

3
42
48

1
43

Passage structure

Point of view
Counterargument

Passage organization
Passage organization
Evidence

Shift of focus

Point of view

--- PAGE 338 ---
Paired Passages Test 4 52 Graphic only

Test 1 49 Test 5 30 Graphic only
Test 1 50 Test 5 31 Graphic only
Test 1 51 Test 5 39 Graphic only
Test 1 52 Evidence Test 5 40 Graphic only
Test 5 41 Graphic + passage
tact 5 Test 6 19 Graphic only
Test 2 32 Test 6 20 Graphic only
Test 6 21 Graphic + passage
; Test 3 38 Function Test 6 51 Graphic only
Test 3 39 Test 6 52 Graphic only
: Test 3 40 Agree Test 7 19 Graphic only
Test 3 41 Test 7 20 Graphic only
Test 4 36 Test 7 21 Graphic + passage
Test 4 37 Evidence (extended reasoning)
Test 4 38 Test 7 50 Graphic + passage —
y Test 4 39 Evidence (function of a graphic)
i Test 4 40 Test 7 51 Graphic only
i Test 5 19 Test 8 19 Graphic only
Test 5 20 Test 8 20 Graphic only
Test 5 4 Test 8 21 Graphic + passage
Test 8 30 Graphic only
Test 6 41 Test 8 31 Graphic + passage
‘ Test 6 42 Agree
{ Test 7 38
? Test 7 39
Test 7 40
P Test 7 41
Test 8 39
Test 8 40
Test 8 41 Function

Graphics and Data Analysis

: Test 1 28 Graphic only
Test 1 29 Graphic + passage
Test 1 30 Graphic only
Test 1 31 Graphic + passage
Test 2 50 Graphic only
Test 2 51 Graphic + passage
Test 2 52 Graphic only
Test 3 50 Graphic only
Test 3 51 Graphic only
Test 3 52 Graphic only
Test 4 50 Graphic only
Test 4 51 Graphic + passage

339

--- PAGE 339 ---
Test 1

*

SNAG WON eR

Appendix B: 2018 Official Guide Questions by Test

Category

Big Picture
Rhetorical Strategy
Vocabulary
Literal Comp.
Evidence
Attitude
Function
Vocabulary
Literal Comp.
Evidence
Main Point
Vocabulary
Literal Comp.
Evidence
Attitude
Literal Comp.
Evidence
Vocabulary
Function
Data Analysis
Inference
Function
Support/Contradict
Literal Comp.
Function
Inference
Function
Data Analysis
Data Analysis
Evidence
Data Analysis
Big Picture
Big Picture
Function
Literal Comp.
Literal Comp.
Evidence
Literal Comp.
Evidence
Vocabulary
Function
Function
Literal Comp.
Evidence
Vocabulary

Sub-Category

Summary
Passage Structure

No line reference

Paragraph

Line reference
Examples

No line reference

Inference
Line reference

Main point
Word
Contradict
Line reference

Graphic only
Graphic + passage
Graphic only
Graphic + passage
Purpose of a passage
Main point
Rhetorical strategy

No line reference

Line reference

Main point

No line reference

46
47
48
49
50
51
52

Test 2

OOnN DOR WPS

Function

Literal Comp.
Vocabulary

P1/P2 Relationship
P1/P2 Relationship
Support

P1/P2 Relationship

Big Picture
Function
Rhetorical Strategy
Function

Literal Comp.
Literal Comp.
Support

Function

Literal Comp.
Evidence

Big Picture
Rhetorical Strategy
Support
Vocabulary
Function
Vocabulary
Support/ Undermine
Main Point

Data Analysis

Data Analysis

Data Analysis
Literal Comp.
Evidence

Literal Comp.
Vocabulary
Inference

Literal Comp.
Function

Big Picture

P1/P2 Relationship
P1/P2 Relationship
P1/P2 Relationship
Big Picture
Function

Literal Comp.
Evidence
Vocabulary
Inference
Vocabulary

No line reference

Line reference

Summaty

Point of view

No line reference
No line reference
No line reference

Purpose of a passage
Counterargument

Support
Graphic only
Graphic only

Graphic + passage
No line reference

Purpose of a passage
Agree
Main point

No line reference

--- PAGE 340 ---
POR ne

40
Al
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52

—|
oO
w
oF
w&

WOON A PWN

Literal Comp.
Evidence
Literal Comp.
Function
Vocabulary
Literal Comp.
Evidence
Vocabulary
Inference
Evidence
Data Analysis
Data Analysis
Data Analysis

Big Picture
Vocabulary
Inference
Evidence
Function
Vocabulary
Literal Comp.
Inference
Literal Comp.
Evidence
Function
Literal Comp.
Evidence

Big Picture
Evidence
Vocabulary
Vocabulary

Support/Contradict

Data Analysis
Data Analysis

Rhetorical Strategy

Vocabulary
Inference
Evidence
Function
Literal Comp.
Literal Comp.
Vocabulary
Inference
Evidence
Vocabulary
Inference
Evidence
Literal Comp.
Vocabulary

No line reference

Line reference

Purpose of a paragraph

No line reference

No line reference
Graphic only

Graphic + passage
Graphic only

Summary

No line reference

No line reference

No line reference

No line reference

Point of a paragraph

Support
Graphic only
Graphic only

Passage organization

Assumption

Line reference
No line reference

No line reference

No line reference

No line reference

39

WOAN DAF ON FR

PBWNNWNNNNNYNNNNRP RPP SPR eRe
RFP OwUPN AUR WON TWO WNA UH WNP RF ©

341

Literal Comp,
Evidence

P1/P2 Relationship
P1/P2 Relationship
P1/P2 Relationship
P1/P2 Relationship
Tone

inference

Evidence

Inference

Evidence
Vocabulary

Big Picture
Inference

Data Analysis

Data Analysis

Data Analysis

Attitude
Evidence
Vocabulary
Function
Literal Comp.
Evidence
Literal Comp.
Inference
Vocabulary
Vocabulary
Big Picture
Literal Comp.
Vocabulary
Literal Comp.
Evidence
Inference
Evidence
Vocabulary
Attitude
Data Analysis
Data Analysis
Big Picture
Attitude
Vocabulary
Inference
Evidence
Literal Comp.
Evidence
Inference
Function
Inference

No line reference
Function

Agree

Line reference

No line reference

Purpose of a paragraph

Assumption

Graphic only
Graphic only
Graphic only

No line reference

No line reference

No line reference

Summary of a paragraph

No line reference
No line reference
No line reference
Graphic

Graphic only
Graphic only

Purpose of a passage

No line reference

No line reference

Punctuation

--- PAGE 341 ---
Literal Comp.
Vocabulary
Vocabulary
Inference

P1/P2 Relationship
Evidence

P1/P2 Relationship
Evidence

P1/P2 Relationship
Big Picture

Big Picture
Rhetorical Strategy
Evidence

Function

Literal Comp.
Evidence

Inference
Support/Contradict
Data Analysis

Data Analysis

Data Analysis

Rhetorical Strategy
Function

Inference

Literal Comp.
Evidence

Literal Comp.
Literal Comp.

Big Picture
Support/Contradict
Vocabulary

Big picture
Support

Inference
Vocabulary
Vocabulary

Big Picture

Big Picture
Evidence

P1/P2 Relationship
P1/P2 Relationship
P1/P2 Relationship
Vocabulary

Literal Comp.
Attitude

Evidence

Literal Comp.
Evidence

No line reference

Line Reference
Line Reference
Purpose of a passage

Purpose of a passage
Passage organization

No line reference

Support

Graphic only
Graphic + passage
Graphic only

Organization/ focus

Purpose of a paragraph

Line reference

Main idea/ paragraph
Support

Point of a passage

Central claim
Point of a passage

Line reference

No line reference

28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45

47
48
49
50
51

~
fJ
a”
ob
[a>

SEVP Onan ONnRH

—
1)

13
14
15
16

18
19
20
21
22
23

342

Literal Comp.
Vocabulary

Data Analysis
Data Analysis
Rhetorical Strategy
Inference
Evidence

Support/ Contradict
Extended Reasoning
Vocabulary
Vocabulary

Data Analysis
Data Analysis
Data Analysis
Literal Comp.
Evidence
Vocabulary

Literal Comp.
Evidence
Vocabulary
Function

Literal Comp.
Inference

Evidence

Function

Function
Vocabulary
Function
Support/Contradict
Function

Function

Inference

Evidence

Literal Comp.
Literal Comp.

Big Picture/Function
Literal Comp.
Evidence
Vocabulary
Function

Literal Comp.
Evidence
Vocabulary

Data Analysis

Data Analysis

Data Analysis

Big Picture/ Function
Literal Comp.

Graphic only
Graphic only
Organization/ focus
No line reference

Support

Graphic only
Graphic only
Graphic + passage
No line reference

No line reference

Purpose of a paragraph
No line reference

Purpose of a question

Purpose of a paragraph

Support

Purpose of a word
No line reference

Attitude

Purpose of a passage
No line reference

No line reference

Graphic only
Graphic only
Graphic + passage
Purpose of a passage

--- PAGE 342 ---
i
i
i
5
i
{

OANA AHO NR a
a”
onal
~

ped ped ee ee ee ed Be pp
CONA TE WONe OS

Inference

Literal Comp.
Vocabulary

Literal Comp.
Evidence

Function

Inference

Literal Comp.
Evidence

Literal Comp.
Evidence
Vocabulary
Function
Vocabulary

Literal Comp.
Evidence

Big Picture/ Function
P1/P2 Relationship
P1/P2 Relationship
Rhetorical Strategy
Vocabulary
Inference

Evidence

Literal Comp.
Evidence
Vocabulary
Function

Data Analysis

Data Analysis

Big Picture

Literal Comp.
Rhetorical Strategy
Function

Literal Comp.
Evidence

Function

Literal Comp.
Evidence
Vocabulary

Big Picture/ Function
Literal Comp.
Evidence

Function
Vocabulary
Attitude

Evidence
Vocabulary

Data Analysis

Line reference

Purpose of a paragraph

No line reference

No line reference

No line reference
Purpose of a passage

Agree
Point of view

No line reference

No line reference

Graphic only
Graph only

Major Theme

No line reference
No line reference
Purpose of a passage
No line reference

“Vague” answers

Line reference

Graphic only

20
21
22
23
24

26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34

36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52

+
®
2]
pe
eo

WONA AP wONe

Data Analysis

Data Analysis

Big Picture/ Function
Function

Inference

Evidence

Punction

Inference

Evidence

Big Picture
Function
Vocabulary
Vocabulary
Inference

Evidence
Vocabulary
Inference

Evidence

P1/P2 Relationship
P1/P2 Relationship
P1/P2 Relationship
P1/P2 Relationship
Rhetorical Strategy
Function

Inference

Evidence

Literal Comp.
Evidence
Rhetorical Strategy
Vocabulary

Data Analysis

Data Analysis
Analogy

Rhetorical Strategy
Function

Extended reasoning
Evidence

Inference

Evidence

Literal Comp.
Vocabulary
Function

Literal Comp.
Function/ Big Picture
Vocabulary
Vocabulary

Literal Comp.
Evidence

Graphic only
Extended reasoning
Purpose of a passage

No line reference

No line reference

Main idea

No line reference

No line reference

Agree

Shift in focus
No line reference

No line reference

Function of a graph
Graphic only

Shift in focus
No line reference

No line reference

Purpose of a passage

No line reference

--- PAGE 343 ---
Extended reasoning
Evidence

Function

Data Analysis

Data Analysis

Data Analysis

Big Picture
Rhetorical Strategy
Evidence
Vocabulary

Literal Comp.
Vocabulary

Literal Comp.
Evidence

Data Analysis

Data Analysis
Function

Inference

Evidence
Vocabulary
Extended reasoning
Evidence
Vocabulary

P1/P2 Relationship
P1/P2 Relationship
Function

Big Picture/ Function
Literal Comp.
Evidence

Tone

Function

Literal Comp.
Literal Comp.
Vocabulary
Extended reasoning
Evidence

Literal Comp.

No line reference

Graphic + passage
Central idea of a passage
Structure of passage

No prior question

No line reference

Graphic + passage

No line reference

No line reference

Agree

Purpose of a passage
No line reference

No line reference

344

--- PAGE 344 ---
Reprints and Permissions

Acheson, Dean. From “Speech at Berkeley, California, March 16, 1950.
http:/ /teachingamericanhistory.org/ library /document/speech-at-berkeley-california/

Adee, Sally. From “Roughnecks in Space: Moon Mining in Science Fiction,” New Scientist, 27 April 2012.
http:/ / www.newscientist.com/ gallery /moon-mining

Anft, Michael. “Solving the Mystery of Death Valley's Walking Rocks,” Johns Hopkins Magazine, 6/1/11.
Reprinted by permission of Jolins Hopkins Magazine. http:/ /archive.magazine.jhu.edu/2011/06/solving-the-
mystery-of-death-valley’s-walking-rocks/

Ansanelli, Sean, “ Makerspaces, Hackerspaces and Community-Scale Production in Detroit and Beyond,”
Urban Magazine, Spring 2013, p. 31. Reprinted by permission of the author.
http:/ / blogs.cuit.columbia.edu/ urbanmagazine/ files /2015/02/ URBAN_Spring2013_WEB.pdf

Archer, Mike. From “Ordering the vegetarian meal? There’s more animal blood on your hands,” The
Conversation, 16 December 2011. http:/ / theconversation.edu.au/ ordering-the-vegetarian-meal-theres-more-
animal-blood-on-your-hands-4659

Austen, Jane. Northanger Abbey. Originally published 1803. Excerpted from Chapter 1 through Project
Gutenberg, http:/ / www.gutenberg.org / files/121/121-h/121-h.htm

Ball, Philip. From “The Trouble With Scientists,” Nautilus, 5/14/15. http:/ /nautil.us/issue/24/error/the-
trouble-with-scientists

Brauer, Wiebke. Adapted from “The Miracle of Space,” Smart Magazine, 10/31/14. Reprinted by permission
of Smart Magazine. http://smart-magazine.com/space/the-miracle-of-space/

de Gouges, Olympe. Adapted from The Declaration of the Rights of Wontan, 1791,
https://chnm.gmu.edu/revolution/d/293/

Douglass, Frederick. Adapted from “Self-Made Men,” 1872. http:/ / www.frederick-douglass-
heritage.org/self-made-men/

DuBois, W.E.B. Adapted from “Atlanta Compromise Speech,” 1895. http:/ /historymatters.gmu.edu/d/39/

Freedman, David. Adapted from’The Truth About Genetically Modified Food,” Scientificamerican.com
(Nature, Inc.), September 1, 2013. https:/ / www.scientificamerican.com/ article/ the-truth-about-genetically-
modified-food/

Gholipour, Babar. Adapted from “Sleep Shrinks the Brain’s Synapses to Make Room for New Learning,”
Scientificamerican.com (Nature, Inc.), May 1, 2017. https:/ /www.scientificamerican.com/ article/sleep-
shrinks-the-brain-rsquo-s-synapses-to-make-room-for-new-learning/

Gompers, Samuel. From “What Does the Working Man Want?” Address to Workers in Louisville, Kentucky,
1890, http:/ /jackiewhiting.net/ HonorsUS/Labor/ gompers.pdf

Gross, Daniel. From “Will We Ever Be Able to Make Traffic Disappear?” Smithsonian.com, 5/7/2015.
http:/ / www.smithsonianmag.com/ innovation/ will-we-ever-be-able-to-make-traffic-disappear-180955164/

Jackson, Julian. “New Research Suggests that Dinosaurs Were Active and Warm-Blooded.” Earth Times,

7/12/11. http:/ /www.earthtimes.org/nature/new-research-sug gests-dinosaurs-warm-blooded-
active/1138/. Reprinted by permission of the author.

345

--- PAGE 345 ---
Jordan, Barbara. Adapted from the Keynote Speech, Democratic National Convention, delivered July 12,
1976, http:/ /www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/ barbarajordan1976dnc.htnl

Kelemen, Peter B. From “The Origin of the Ocean Floor,” Scientific American, February 2009. Reproduced
with permission, © 2009, Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.
hitp:/ / www.scientificamerican.com/ article/ the-origin-of-the-ocean-floor/

Kincaid, Jamaica. Excerpt from “Gwen” from ANNIE JOHN by Jamaica Kincaid. Copyright © 1985 by
Jamaica Kincaid. Reprinted by permission of Farrar, Straus and Giroux, LLC.

Koerth-Baker, Maggie: From “The Power of Positive Thinking, Truth or Myth?” Live Science, 8/29/08.
http:/ / www. livescience.com/ 2814-power-positive-thinking-truth-my th.html

Leech, Kirk: From “Why Moralism Spoils the Appetite,” Spiked Review of Books, No. 53, February 2012.
http:/ /www.spiked-online.com/review_of_books/article/12154#.VaV2PFoT-fQ

Lehrer, Jonah. Adapted from “Under Pressure: The Search for Stress Vaccine,” Wired, 7/28/10, 2:00 p.m.
http:/ /www.wired.com/2010/07/ff_stress_cure/

Lincoln, Abraham. Adapted from “First Inaugural Address,” March 4, 1861.
http:/ /avalon.law.yale.edu/19th_century/lincoln1.asp

McConneil, David. From “Playing with Infinity on Riker’s Island,” Prospect, February 2012.
http:/ / www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/science-and-technology / playing-with-infinity-on-rikers-island

Miller, Greg, From “How Our Brains Make Memories,” Smithsonian.com, May 2010.
http:/ /www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/how-our-brains-make-memories-14466850/

Mills, Mark, From “Every Breath You Take,” City Journal, 7/2/13, http:/ / www.city-
journal.org/2013/bce0702mm.html

Montero, Barbara Gail. From “The Myth of ‘Just Do it,” The New York Times, 6/9/13.
http:/ /opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/ author /barbara-gail-montero/

Nuwer, Rachel. “What is a Species?” Smithsonian.com, 11/6/13.
http:/ / www.smithsonianmag.com/ science-nature/ what-is-a-species-insight-from-dolphins-and-humans-
18094.7580/ ?no-ist

Orwell, George. Adapted from “Keep the Apidastra Flying,” originally published 1936, Accessed from
Project Gutenberg, http:/ / gutenberg.net.au/ebooks02/0200021.txt

Panko, Ben. “What Does it Mean to Be a Species? Genetics is Changing the Answer,” Smithsonian.com,
May 19, 2017. http:// www.smithsonianmag.com/ science-nature/ what-does-it-mean-be-species-genetics-

changing-answer-180963380/

Riggio, Ronald. Excerpted from “Why Certain Smells Trigger Positive Memories,” Psychology Today, May 1,
2012. Reprinted by permission of the author.

“The Rise of the Sharing Economy,” The Economist, 3/9/2013.
http:/ /www.economist.com/ news / leaders /21573104-internet-every thing-hire-rise-sharing-economy

Rousseau, Jean-Jacques. From The Social Contract, 1762, trans. GDH Cole,
http://www.gutenberg.org/ files/ 46333 /46333-h/46333-h.htm

Rupp, Rebecca. From “Surviving the Sneaky Psychology of Supermarkets,” National Geograpltic, 6/15/15.
http:/ / theplate.nationalgeographic.com/ 2015/06/15/surviving-the-sneaky-psychology-of-supermarkets/

346

--- PAGE 346 ---
Sainani, Kristin. Adapted from “What, Me Worry?” Stanford Magazine, May /June 2014.
https:/ /alumni.stanford.edu/get/page/magazine/article/?article_id=70134. Reprinted by permission of the
author.

Schwartz, Barry. “More Isn’t Always Better,” Harvard Business Review, June 2006. Reprinted by permission of
Harvard Business Publishing. https:/ /hbr.org/2006/06/more-isnt-always-better

“Scientists Discover Salty Aquifer, Previously Unknown Microbial Habitat Under Antarctica,” © 2015,
Dartmouth College. http:/ / www.sciencenewsline.com/ articles /2015042815560014.html

Sullivan, John Jeremiah. “One of Us,” Lapham’s Quarterly, Spring 2013.
http:/ /www.laphamsquarterly.org/animals/one-us

Taylor, Astra. “A Small World After All,” Bookfortm, June/July / August 2013.
http:/ /www.bookforum.com/ inprint/ 020_02/11685

Thompson, Helen. “Yawning Spreads Like a Plague in Wolves,” Smithsonian.com, 8/27/14,
http:/ /www.smithsonianmag.com/ science-nature/ yawning-spread-plague-wolves-180952484/

Tregaskis, Sharon. “The Buzz: What Bees Tell Us About Global Climate Change, Johns Hopkins Magazine.
6/2/2010. Reprinted by permission by Johns Hopkins Magazine.
http:/ /archive.magazine.jhu.edu/2010/06/the-buzz-what-bees-tell-us-about-global-climate-change/

Washington, Booker T. “The Talented Tenth,” 1903.
http:/ / teachingamericanhistory.org/ library /document/ the-talented-tenth/

Wayman, Erin. “The First Americans,” Smithsonian.com, 11/28/11.
http:/ / www.smithsonianmag.com/ science-nature/ the-first-americans-889302/

Wharton, Edith. Summer, originally published 1917. Excerpted from Chapter 1 through Project Gutenberg,
http:/ /www.gutenberg.org/ files/166/166-h/166-h.him

Webster, Daniel. Adapted from the “Seventh of March Speech to the Senate,” 1850,
https:/ /www.dartmouth.edu/~dwebster/ speeches /seventh-march.html

“Why Eat Locally?” The Regal Vegan, http:/ / www.regalvegan.com/ site/local-yokels/

347

--- PAGE 347 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Erica Meltzer earned her B.A. from Wellesley College and spent more than a decade tutoring privately
in Boston and New York City, as well as nationally and internationally via Skype. Her experience working
with students from a wide range of educational backgrounds and virtually every score level, from the
sixth percentile to the 99, gave her unique insight into the types of stumbling blocks students often
encounter when preparing for standardized reading and writing tests.

She was inspired to begin writing her own test-prep materials in 2007, after visiting a local bookstore in
search of additional practice questions for an SAT Writing student, Unable to find material that replicated.
the contents of the exam with sufficient accuracy, she decided to write her own. What started as a handful
of exercises jotted down on a piece of paper became the basis for her first book, the original Ultimate Guide
to SAT Grammar, published in 2011. Since that time, she has authored guides for SAT reading and
vocabulary, as well as verbal guides for the ACT®, GRE®, and GMAT®. Her books have sold more than
100,000 copies and are used around the world, She lives in New York City, and you can visit her online at
www.thecriticalreader.com.

349

--- PAGE 348 ---
The Critical Reader: The Complete Guide to SAT® Reading is designed to clearly
and systematically demystify what is often considered the most challenging
section of the exam. Whether you are seeking a comprehensive review or need
to focus on just a few key areas, this book teaches you the skills and strategies
you need to master the SAT Reading Test with confidence.

Includes:

e A chapter-by-chapter breakdown of question types, with in-depth explanations
and numerous examples demonstrating how to work through each category.

e Techniques for understanding complex passages and identifying key information
quickly and efficiently.

e Extensive strategies for simplifying and answering paired supporting evidence
and graphic-based data analysis questions.

¢ A list of common terms with alternate definitions, plus strategies for determining
the meanings of words used in unfamiliar ways.

As a bonus, this book also includes a detailed index of Reading questions from
The Official SAT® Prep Guide, 2018 Edition, arranged by both category and test.
This unique resource allows you to pinpoint the areas you need to focus on, and
create a study plan adapted to your individual needs.

In 2007, Erica Meltzer answered a Craigslist ad for an SAT tutor and unexpectedly
found herself in the high-pressure world of Manhattan test prep. Today, she
is the author of guides for the SAT®, ACT®, GRE® and GMAT®. Her books are
used around the world, and her work has been cited in Teen Vogue, The College
Solution, and CBS MarketWatch. She lives in New York City, and you can visit her
online at www.thecriticalreader.com.

ISBN 9780997517:

90000 >

873

ATHE CRITICAL READER

SAT® is a trademark registered by the College Board, which is
not affiliated with, and does not endorse, this publication.

9"780997 "517873

