--- PAGE 1 ---
Based on National Curriculum of Pakistan 2022-23.

Textbook of

English

Grade

12

National Curriculum Council
Ministry of Federal Education and Professional Training

National Book Foundation
3 as
Federal Textbook Board
Islamabad

--- PAGE 2 ---
Government Approval
Approved by the National Curriculum Council (NCC), Ministry of Federal Education and Professional Training, Islamabad
vide letter No. F.No.1-2/2024/NBF/English, dated: November 05, 2024

© 2025 National Book Foundation (NBF) as Federal Textbook Board

All rights to this publication are strictly reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—without the prior express
written consent of the publisher. Unauthorized use, duplication, or distribution Is strictly prohibited and may result in legal action.

A Textbook of English for Grade 12
based on National Curriculum of Pakistan (NCP) 2022-23

Authors
Ruhi Zaka Malik (Managing Author)
Amber Kashif (Co-Author)

Contributors/Collaborators
Inam Ullah Jan (Designer)

i

Supervision of Curriculum and Review Process
; Dr. Shafquat Ali Janjua
Joint Educational Advisor, National Curriculum Council (NCC)
Ministry of Federal Education and Professional Training, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad

NCC Review Committee Members
Yaseer Arfat , Saima Hafeez, Imran Khalid Khan,Saman Akbar, Tehmina Adnan, Mr. Abdul Hanan, Mrs. Zehra Khushal

Desk Officer
Mrs. Zehra Khushal, (Assistant Educational Advisor), National Curriculum Council (NCC)

a
NBF Textbooks Development Supervision

Or. Kamran Jahangir
Managing Director, National Book Foundation (NBF)

In-Charge, NBF Textbooks Development
Mansoor Ahmad, Assistant Director

Printed in Pakistan
First Edition: First Impression: June, 2025 | Pages: 194 | Quantity: 100000
Price: PKR 270/-, Code: STE-732, ISBN: 978-969- 37-1833-1 feat]

Printer: Top Mountain Printers, Lahore

For details on additional publications from the National Book Foundation, please visit our website at www.nbf.org.pk
You can also reach us by phone at 051 9261125 or via email at books@nbf.org.pk '
For feedback or corrections, kindly send your comments to ‘nbftextbooks@gmail.com' and ‘textbooks @snc.gov. pk

Note
All illustrations, artwork, and images in this book are intended solely for educational
and promotional purposes, benefiting the public interest.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Preface

Text Book of Grade 12: An Introduction to the structure and purpose.

This book is second book of the group of four textbooks (IX-XII) developed on a similar pattern and in
accordance with National Curriculum of Pakistan IX-XIl (NCP) 2022. This book is aimed to provide
students of elementary grades a range of activities to help them achieve students learning objectives of
their appropriate age/ grade. The book provides the students with a range of fiction and non-fiction texts
which are acquired from both authentic sources as well as exclusively produced for this age group of
Pakistan students. The selection/development of contents of books has been purposely carried out in
the context of multilingual communities where English is treated as second or third language.

This unique arrangement of textual materials provide a platform where students can improve their
reading, writing, speaking and listening skills. Themes of the selected texts are selected in accordance
with list of themes provided across the wide range of genre indicated in NCP. The ethical concepts
embedded in the texts will engage students to think and relate with real concerns of their lives and
reflect upon their own personality development towards becoming a responsible citizen. This book is
designed to provide a wide range of readings with a variety of local, national and international contexts
which will enable students to learn about their identity and connection to the world. The variety of
activities will help them to make these connections and to think critically.

This book is structured in a way to provide in-depth knowledge and exposure to different types/genres
of literary texts. Units are grouped together in a section with a specific theme like narratives, poetry or
drama. Each section has set of activities towards the end to engage the students in high order thinking
skills, critical evaluation, differentiate and extended activities all set in the backdrop of contextual
‘needs, Each unit begins with a pre-reading activity and have while reading activities to keep students
engaged in the reading and help them in comprehension of the text. Each unit has a range of questions
based on different stages of understanding and comprehension and students will have to answer
questions based on reading for detail to reading for inferences and ideas. Use of dictionary and
pronunciation is taught through direct and indirect usages of dictionary sources.

There is strong focus of writing activities and for that, a range of writing assignments are introduced
which demand outcomes both as independent writers as well as in pairs/group work. The variety of
writing assignments has been designed to expose students with different types of texts like
informational texts, expository text and imaginative work of writing. Activities like role-plays, debates,
one-minute speech, drama and poetry recitals are introduced to provide students with the
opportunities of listening and speaking English. These activities are designed with special focus on
listening and speaking for different audiences and different situations. The purpose of these activities is
to provide backdrop to develop effective communication skills in English. The difficulty level of all
activities is varied to cater for learning needs of students from multilingual backgrounds and multiple
local/national context.

The targets of all planned activities can be achieved fully with an active support of teacher. Evidently all
such activities shall require diligent effort of teacher to guide the students in appropriate manner as
well as to provide them with continuous support. Activities requiring searching for additional
information through library and/or online sources shall also need special assistance from teacher. This
active support from the teacher shall help students to fully benefit from this purposely designed text
book of English to acquire better English language skills.

Dr. Kamran Jahangir
Managing Director

--- PAGE 4 ---
Objective Analysis of the Textbook

The textbook comprises 16 chapters and is analyzed in the light of checklist based on Curriculum
2016. The provided parameters, desired learning objectives are addressed. The textbook fulfills
and qualifies standards established by the curriculum to enable learners to use English language
for social and academic purposes.

Unit 1

Lingkuan Gorge: It gives a lesson to live peacefully and understand other's viewpoint.
Responsibility towards one's job is of prime importance. The unit provides a guideline to live a
congenial, peaceful, and caring life with full co-operation for those around us.

Unit 2

Population Explosion in Pakistan: Discussion on a sensitive issue is coherently explained, which
will give awareness to students. They will understand how over-population affects the progress of
a country. It would enable ciate to focus on spreading the literacy programmes/ suggestions
across.

Unit 3

The Income-Tax Man: Students will get an idea how to focus on the choice of a profession. Income
tax generates revenue for a Country and students will get a fairly good idea of the income tax
related issues. The extended discussion between the two characters would reveal how
responsible people perform their duties. They can have a debate in the class to discuss the
importance of tax collection.

Unit 4

Rubayiat of Omar Khayam (poem): Attentive listening skills would improve and help students in
communication in daily life. The pleasure of reading a poem can best be derived by reading it. The
belief in determination and disbelief in immortality portrays the true meaning of life. It would
certainly show a way to the readers to have full faith in what they decide to do. Glossary will
certainly add up to their vocabulary enabling them to write better English. Summary writing skills
would help in understanding the main points of any narration.

Unit 5

The Blanket: The respect of human relationships holds top priority in families. The grandson's
love and wisdom plays an important role in the twist in the story. There's a lesson that we must
respect and facilitate our elders in their old age. A sense of hope and renewed appreciation for
the special moments we share with our loved ones is a lesson.

Unit 6

Stay Hungry---Stay Foolish: Comprehension, eloquence, articulation and oration are exemplary
in this unit, which will help students to improve their skills and focus on their objectives. The
efforts, determination, perseverance and never giving up are the guideline for the readers.

Students will learn the value of taking risks and viewing failures as an opportunity to learn and
grow.

Unit7

Tobacco and your Health: This unit defines that smoking is injurious to health. It increases the
risk of heart disease besides the highly recognized role of cigarette smoking to cause cancer. It
implicates many other chronic diseases like bronchitis and pulmonary malfunction. Students
would understand to take care of one’s health and never get into the habit of smoking.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Unit 8 ;
The Sea (poem): The poet's imagination and perception describes to remain calm. If the sea can

calm itself, why can't we. The ocean is beautiful, mysterious and the central image. It symbolizes
a great journey and can easily be related with human life and likely to change the perception.

Unit 9
First Year at Harrow: The author's experience as a student is of great interest and lays stress on

the importance of hard work while studying. He emphasizes that all students should prioritize to
learn English to avoid all difficulties in the affairs of our daily life. This knowledge proved
extremely useful for him to earn his livelihood and pursue a promising career.

Unit 10
There's A New Planet in Sight: The lesson opens up the knowledge of new vistas concerning

_Space. Students’ enthusiasm to. have knowledge about space will get a direction, Latest science
discoveries about planefs and ozone will compel students to search and gain more knowledge
about the subject.

Unit 11
Harvest Hymn (poem): Farmers damage the environment through overuse of chemicals. It's a

lamentation on modern man's exploitation of nature for selfish gains. The land becomes polluted
and infertile. Students will understand that natural resources should not be depleted for the
fulfilment of personal desires. Students will be able to relate it with their daily lives.

Unit 12

Kaghan Valley: The readers will be familiarized with the picturesque valley, surrounded by
majestic mountains, fascinating terrain with forests, rivers and glaciers. It wor..d enhance the
students’ interest to see these beautiful areas of Pakistan, and observe how people live in those
areas. They would know how to plan these trips and do the preparations. Students can give
suggestions to improve tourism in Pakistan, which can be very profitable.

Unit 13

After Twenty Years: Honesty towards duty, truthfulness, abiding law and valuing sincere
friendship are masterfully highlighted in the unit. Fulfilling his promise, Jimmy came to the
decided place after twenty years, but his loyalty has changed. He is now more loyal to his job asa
police officer. His friendship with Bob is secondary. Students will be able to configure if it was right
to be loyal to his duty. The writer has left the decision to readers.

Unit 14
The Solitary Reaper: The poem is about the power of human imagination to transform common,

everyday events into representations of a large reality. The poet does not understand the
language of the girl singing, but he was much fascinated by the music. It was an ecstatic
environment. The girl was happily ‘cutting and binding’ the yield. It gives a lesson to perform one's
work happily and that creates happiness for the listeners too.

Unit 15

The Pearl (Novel): The Pearl is a novel that demonstrates the evils of greed and ambition. It
reflects Steinbeck's keen interest in socio-economic issues. The novel is a rich narrative that
explores themes of greed and the struggle against adversity. Students will comprehend that the
narrative serves as a critique of inequality. There is a lesson that one should take care of one's
desires in a positive way.

--- PAGE 6 ---
S.No Units Theme Sub-Theme
LINGKUAN GORGE Peaceful Success stories
(Tu Peng Cheng) Co-existence narrative stories
3 THE INCOME-TAX MAN Literature & Poetry Industrial Revolution
Mark Twain (1835-1910) Soft Skills Moral stories ‘
Rubaiyat of Omar Khayam . . . .
4 Edward Fitzgerald (1809-1883) Literature & Poetry Spiritualism (Rubaiyat)
THE BLANKET . :
9 | Floyd Dell (1887-1969) ecciaeaeneiiiiiel
STAY HUNGRY - STAY F ws
6 (Excerpts from...... ) eo i Soft Skills Decision making
, 7 bares AND YOUR HEALTH Drug Education Prevention si drugs
8 THE SEA Nature and natural Poetry/ literature
James Reeves resources
9 First Year At Harrow Soft Skills Autobiography ‘
Sir Winston S. Churchill Literature & Poetry short stories
10

THERE'S A NEW PLANET IN SIGHT] Innovation and Innovation & creativity ’
Catherine Clark Fox (1917-2008) Creativity in science
HARVEST HYMN Nature and s
11 T john Betjeman (1906-1984) natural resources Efyironment Matters
THE KAGHAN VALLEY . se
/ l
Tahir Jahangir Travel and Tourism Travel writing/ travel log

-_s
N

AFTER TWENTY YEARS F . ;
& Poet Human Relationships
13. | o Henry (1862-1910) ereure ry P
The Solitary Reaper Nature and Connecting People and
14 William Wordsworth (1770-1850) natural resources Nature, Poetry/ literature

DG-Miineulr Peace, justice, freedom
15 | The Pearl Development Goals, for all and strong institutions,
John Steinbeck (Novel) Literature & Poetry Human Relationships/small plays

‘

--- PAGE 7 ---
Reading and Oral Vocabulary ty
critical uBeing se tenunlsotien and Grammar

questions on a scot pe ogg eran phe pd tl
eee Pe mipdenrre how pagans pore corrcate Sonal raed cnge erent xs
to structure specific parts of a text oe ae
ania, oe
orn ina aotent Ach Activity

Eciting and proofreading skills to a range of
—_—

sof oe ent coos
scare eat
Eeeionaaee

po LO
situations/events,

Engen nnd discussions

Nuances
= Herons
macditesne Aspect of time yin
quand st atchy ga speach and wring, Achy
Demonstrate attentive
‘rgansatealpatensin listening’ skils while working } SOs and prepcalional ” | P8raphrase the poem poem sanza wise
= am atl in a whole class ....., resample collapse ome the summary
rage recog on od
and
: cottny pr ape carer prootreading, Activity

Pon

cats af hae wating fer
bts

115

127

141

149

--- PAGE 8 ---
ous THOUGHTS ee tain

ash PROFIT=: as
, BRATION 7a commms COUNCEPTS = “—

COMMUNITY... “DIVERS TY po om

INCLUSION:

er PTS SOR Yr ine ee t SHAKES TAN WALYSIS ao a
GENDER TEAMWORK eis’ Somme
FARCHIN Gob AMS ;

LINGKUAN GORGE

(Tu Peng Cheng)

After completing this lesson, you will be able to:

* respond to questions on a range of communicative purposes.....

* analyse how an author's choices concerning how to structure specific parts of a text (e.g., the
choice of where to begin or end a story, the choice to provide a comedic or tragic resolution)
contribute to its overall structure and meaning as well as its aesthetic impact........

* use pre-reading and while-reading strategies to analyse and explore different layers of meaning
within texts including biases and opinions. Read and use inference and deduction to recognise
implicit meaning (e.g. look for supporting details within a text/paragraph) using prior -
knowledge and contextual cues effectively. Link new facts, terms, and concepts with prior
knowledge. Choose words and phrases for effect.......

* evaluate the particular elements of a story or drama (e.g., how the setting shapes the
characters or plot).......

e clarify the meaning of unknown and multiple-meaning words and phrases based on grades 9-10
and 11 & 12 reading and content, choosing flexibly from a range of strategies.

+ Use context (e.g., the overall meaning of a sentence, paragraph, or text; a word's position
or function in a sentence) as a clue to the meaning of a word or phrase.

+ Identify and correctly use patterns of word changes that indicate different meanings or parts
of speech (e.g., analyze, analysis, analytical; advocate, advocacy).

+ Consult general and specialized reference materials (e.g., dictionaries, glossaries,
thesauruses), both print and digital, to find the pronunciation of a word or determine or
clarify its precise meaning, its part of speech, or its etymology.

+ Verify the preliminary determination of the meaning of a word or phrase (e.g., by checking
the inferred meaning in context or in a dictionary).

°° use all types of tenses correctly in speech and writing. Use gerunds, infinitives, and participles.

Use the aspect of time correctly in speech and writing

apply editing and proofreading skills to a range of different texts and contexts

write multiple paragraphs essays/stories; multi-stanza poems or play script using mechanics of

correct writing

--- PAGE 9 ---
© Pre-Reading
a) What would make aperson an ideal choice to communicate with?
b) Howdoes responsibility sharing contribute to peaceful living?

'

The snow, already half a foot deep, obliterated the line between earth and sky, behind a hazy
white curtain. | had been following the path of the future railway for forty kilometers. Although |
could hear the roar of machinery further back in the hills,! had seen neither work sites nor
workers.

Entering Lingkuan Gorge, my irritation increased. Even in clear weather, the sun never shone on
this gorge, it didn’t matter where you looked up along the twisting course--------- the most you
could see of the sky was a patch, no bigger than the palm of your hand. Now it was dusk, and the
swirling snowflakes and the gale made every step a struggle.

Construction in the gorge was going on feverishly. Everywhere people were at work. Generators,
cement-mixers and air compressors shook the ground. Hundreds of light bulbs gleamed dim and
yellow. Electric wires, criss-crossing like a spider web were scarcely visible, but | could see the
overhead cables and their pulley cars, sliding back and forth, loaded with materials.

Hungry and cold, | tripped and fell, scraping my hands. Enough! I'd find some place under a cliff
and rest a few hours. If | reached the materials depot tomorrow morning by ten O'clock, that still
wouldn't be too late. Stumbling around in the dark like this, | was liable to fall into some deep
ravine, and that would be the end of this Materials .
Development Chief, I'd have to be put on the ‘Used up’ While-reading
list! What indicates that the cave was
| noticed a path leading to a cave in the cliffside. A door | undoubtely occupied by the workers?
curtain, hanging in the way, showed that the cave was
undoubtedly occupied by workers. Grasping branches
along the steep path, I hauled myself up to the door and entered.

. Strange! Seated on a small stool in the doorway was a little boy, seven or eight years old, elbows
on his knees, supporting his face in his hands, his cheeks were red with Cold. He had been peering

at the opposite cliffside through a rent in the curtain. He glanced,at me briefly as | came in, then
went back to his observation.

The cave was large, but quite warm. It had a stove and cooking utensils. On the walls above a bed,
was a colored New Year picture of ‘Chubby Children Pulling the Turnip’. All the walls had been
prepared with old newspapers, now blackened by smoke of the stove

“Why isn’t anybody home?” | asked, shaking the snow from my coat and hat.

The little boy turned his head. His eyes flashed. “Aren't | anybody, uncle?” He rose and walked
towards me, his hands behind his back, his chest extended, as if to say: Not only am | somebody,
I'm a very grown-up somebody!

I cupped his round little face in my hands. “You're pretty sharp, young imp!

--- PAGE 10 ---
He pushed my hands aside. Doubling up his fists, he cocked his head to one side and demanded:
“Who are you calling me imp? | have a name!” Pointing at the baby girl asleep on the bed, he
informed me: “Her name is Pao-cheng, mine is Cheng-yu.”

No doubt about it, these kids were like thousands of others | had met, born and raised on
construction sites. The workers liked to name their children after the projects where they were
born. Cheng-yu probably had first seen the light of day, on the railway project between Chengtu
and Chungking, also known as Yu. His baby sister Pao-cheng, very likely had been born right here
at the future Paoki-Chengtu railway.

| sat by the stove, smoking and rubbing the drying mud from my hands.
Cheng-yu crawled on to my lap and looked into my eyes, “Is it going to snow tomorrow, uncle?”

| pressed his little icy red nose. “As soon as we get our telephone line connected up with heaven,
I'll ask for you.”

Angrily, he leaped down and stood a meter away, scowling at me.” Quit your kidding! You've got a
newspaper in your pocket. Why don't you look at the weather report?”

He resumed his seat in the doorway, clamped his elbows on his knees, rested his face in his hands,
and peered out through the rent in the curtain. When | asked him where the kettle was, he
ignored me. .| certainly was sorry! had offended my small host.

“Why do you want to know about the snow, Cheng-yu?” | asked him”.Is it because you can't go out
and play when it's snowing?” .

He didn't even bother to look at me. “Papa says if it’s still snowing tomorrow, we'll have to quit
work.”

“What does your pa do?”
“He opens up mountains!” The child replied |'While-reading

_ proudly, “He opens up mountains!” The child
“Where?” replied proudly. What does this reply

mean?

Cheng-yu pointed with pursed lips at the work site
opposite.

| looked. All | could see was a searchlight beam, shining through the drifting snowflakes straight
up into the heavens. In its light | could vaguely discern a few dozen men, who seemed posted to
the side of the towering cliff, drilling holes for dynamic charges. The holes were like the steps of a
ladder to the sky.

“How can you tell which one is your father at this distance?” | asked.
“| can't see him plainly, but pa says he can see me. He says all he has to do is turn around. | often sit
here so that he can see me.”

Ah! So that was it.
- The icy snow melted from my boots. My numbed legs, thawing out, ached painfully. | stamped to
help the circulation.
Cheng-yu waived his hand warningly. | understood. He was afraid I'd wake his baby sister.

“You really take good care of your sister,” | commended.

“Mama says my job is to look after her. When mama comes home, | can knock off.”

,

a

10

--- PAGE 11 ---
“So you are on the job every day?” | hugged him. “What does mama do?”
He pointed to the road below the cave.

| could see a person, standing by a telephone poll, beside the road. caren with snow, she looked
like a white stone image. Apparently, she was directing traffic. The road, not very wide, had been
blasted through the rock. Ordinarily, carts, mules, donkeys, people------ no doubt steamed in both
directions along the road, twenty-four hours a day. Someone had to keep the traffic.

Today, because of the heavy snow, there weren't many people or vehicles on the road. She could
have very well spent the day at home. But there she stood and there she would remain, three
months, five months or three years, if need be. Perhaps, from time to time, she raised her head to
gaze up at her child, or at her husband who was scaling the cliffs, between the mountains and the
sky. When he paused to swipe the sweat from his brow,
could he see the determined figure of his wife, or the | while-reading
tiny image of his little boy? Even though in this tough, | Why was the mother raising her head
snowy, windy night, his wife and children couldn't see | from time to time?
one another clearly, | was.sure they could feel a mutual
loving encouragement, and sense that each was looking
forward to the moment of family reunion.

I glanced at Cheng-yu. The child had placed his hands in his sleeves, and pulled his neck into his
collar. He kept dozing off.

“You are liable to catch a chill. Better get into bed and go to sleep”.

He looked at me dreamily for a moment, probably thinking that his parents had returned.
When he realized who | was, he shook his head violently. “No. | won't!”

“Why not”?

He rubbed his eyes with his fists. “Papa and mama say a man should never leave his post”.

| hugged him tightly and pressed my cheek against his. Then | rose, buttoned my coat, pulled my
hat down firmly, left the cave and walked down the path. Following the road that had been
blasted through the rock, | pushed on, the words of the child echoing in my head: “A man should

never leave his post”. A job was waiting for me. | wanted to reach my destination without any
further delay.

© Post-reading

1. After reading the first two paragraphs what do you think are the feelings of the
narrator?

What do you understand by the following descriptions in the unit?

a) © Hazy white curtain b) crisscrossing like a spider web
a) clamped his elbows on his knees d) to vaguely discern

Are you impressed by the wisdom of the boy? Explain with examples.

Do you think the narrator learnt a lesson from the young boy's sense of
responsibility?

--- PAGE 12 ---
Notes and comments ‘

Tu Peng-Cheng, born in 1921 in the province of Shensi in China, worked as a war correspondent
for the New Chinese News during the Chinese civil war in 1940's. He is acclaimed for his war
novel, “Defend Yenan” which was published in 1954. “In Peacetime” is another famous novel to
his credit.

Theme

Sense of responsibility, as portrayed by the author is the main theme. A7 or 8 years old boy is
exemplary. No matter what the nature of one’s duties or responsibilities may be, one should
attend to those assiduously and faithfully.

© Glossary

Words Meanings Synonyms

clamped to put securely in place to hold tightly

—" WQPerne
merece dies
Ce
paniwanetonrama |
schdvtonibcebaretnasemiah |
avielonticharpecnpentuthewebey|
amano |
Cd
anomeric |
ee)

. Se
ce

ya
A
wi

looking in a bad temper or angry way
scraping rubbing against something sharp or rough

swirling moving quickly with a whirling motion

--- PAGE 13 ---
a. Answer the following questions.
1. Describe the narrator's job and the purpose of his journey.

2. Explain the reason which compelled the narrator to take rest for few hours.

3. What was Cheng-yu's reply when the narrator asked, “Why isn't anybody home?”

4. Describe the nature of the job of Cheng-yu's parents.

5. Give an account of Cheng-yu's responsibility in the absence of his parents.

6. What was Cheng-yu's reply to the narrator's advice to go to sleep?

7. How does the narrator act in the final paragraph? What is waiting for him?

8. Whatideas were conveyed in the story about work?

9. Doyou think it is an inspirational story? If so, support you answer with evidence.
b. Choose the best option. . ;

i- Construction in the gorge was goingon_—“(i‘“CCS
a- feverishly b-childishly c-slowly ‘ d- patiently
ii- | noticed a path leading to a in the Cliffside.

a- city b- home c- cave d- village
iii-“As soon as we get our____————__ line connected up with heaven, I'tl ask for you.”
a- straight b- telephone c- clear d- weak

c. Author's choices concerning how to structure specific parts of a text

Authors wield a lot of power in how they
structure their writing. Their choices about
specific parts of a text can affect the reader in
many ways

¢ Beginning (Hook, Setting the
Scene): An author can grab your
attention from the first sentence with
_ agripping scene, a thought-provoking
question, or even a mysterious
character. This opening sets the tone
for the entire story and creates your
initial impression of the world and
characters.

* Point of View and Narrative Voice:
The author's decision on who tells the
story (first-person, third-person,
etc.) and the voice they use (serious,

SE ee
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
funny, etc.) heavily shapes how you perceive the events and characters.

e Plot Structure (Linear, Flashbacks, Foreshadowing): The order in which events unfold
can create suspense, surprise, or a sense of mystery. Authors may use flashbacks to reveala
character's past or foreshadow future events to keep you guessing.

e Pacing (Fast-Paced, Slow Burn): The speed at which the story progresses can create a
sense of urgency, calmness, or build tension.

e Ending (Resolution, Cliffhanger): The way a story concludes can leave you feeling
satisfied, shocked, or wanting more. An author's choice of ending can significantly impact
the overall meaning of the work.

Activity : Read the above story carefully and answer the following questions.
Text Title: '
Ps el GY RPT es de oye

e Beginning (Hook, Setting the Scene):

1. How does the author grab your attention at the beginning? (e.g., Action
scene, question, character introduction).

2. What is the initial impression you get of the world and characters based on
the opening?

Point of View and Narrative Voice:
1. Whois telling the story (e.g., first-person, third-person)? -

2. How does the voice used by the narrator (serious, funny, etc.) affect your
perception of the events and characters?

Plot Structure (Linear, Flashbacks, Foreshadowing):

1. Is the story told in a linear fashion (from beginning to end) or does it use
flashbacks or flash-forwards?

. Are there any hints or clues (foreshadowing) suggesting future events? If
so, what are they? -

. How does the order in which events unfold affect the suspense, surprise, or
overall mystery of the story?

Pacing (Fast-Paced, Slow Burn):

1. Would you describe the pacing of the story as fast-paced or slow burning?
Provide examples from the text to support your answer.

2. How does the pacing affect the mood or tension of the story?
Ending (Resolution, Cliffhanger):
1. Does the story have aclear resolution or is it left open-ended?
2. How does the ending make you feel (satisfied, shocked, wanting more)?

3. How does the author's choice of ending impact the overall meaning of the
work

14

--- PAGE 15 ---
Vocabulary
1. The reader's curiosity remains aroused till the end. Is it because of the:
a) Effective substance
b) Interesting dialogues
c) Strong character of the little boy
d) Good beginning
e) Well- knit end

7 Elements of Story Writing
. Plot: Build a sequence of events that is straightforward but also able to surprise the reader
with twists.
2. Characters: Create complex and relatable character types and traits.
3. Setting: Tell the reader where and when your story is taking place.
4. Conflict: Decide where the interests of the protagonist and antagonist will collide.
5. Theme: Sprinkle your story’s “big idea” or underlying message about life into the details.
6
7

—

- Point of view: Pick who is telling your story.
. Tone: Establish a general feeling for the story with vivid word choice.

All these are the necessary parts to make a story forceful, interesting and knowledgeable

Activity: rvaluate the particular elements of this story that how the setting shapes the

characters or plot.

Respond to questions on a range of communicative purposes
Discuss in groups:
* What challenges are faced by families in Pakistan to raise their children?
e Have you ever heard or seen a family like the one above?
¢ Compare the social status of this family with any family that you know.

1. Howcan struggle and persistence pave the way to prosperity?
2. Responsibility towards duty can save people from embarrassment. Do you agree?

Vocabulary and Grammar

Tenses

Since your school section, you have been learning and practicing all types of tenses. There is
a chart given below . Revise all the tenses and their formation

15

--- PAGE 16 ---
Tenses and their Formulas

Subject + am/are/is + verb-ing

‘ * They had left before |
Past Perfect , He had been waiting for an
ure simote Subject + will + base verb | will go tomorrow.
Subject + will be + verb-ing She will be studying at 8 PM.
Subject + will have + past
Future Perfect participle | will have finished by then.
Future Perfect Subject + will have been + verb- By next year, we will have
Continuous ing been working here.

' Activity: Give two examples of each tense accordingly for further progress.

16

--- PAGE 17 ---
Gerunds, infinitives and participles

Gerunds

are verbals ending in “-ing”
that function as nouns.

Example: He enjoys reading mystery
novels before bed.

In this sentence, “reading mystery
novels before bed” is a gerund phrase
functioning as the direct object of the
verb “enjoys”.

Ending in “-ing” that function as
nouns. :

ee

Activity:

Participles
are verbals that function
as adjectives and can
end in “-ing” (present —
participles) or “-ed”

(past participles).

Example: The dog, braking toudly,
alerted us to the intruder.

In this sentence, “barking loudly” is a.

participial clause modifying the noun

a) Underline the gerunds in each sentence.
1. Raising the funds proved to be a difficult task.
2. Ahmad hoped to obtain a job by learning the welding trade.
3. The Khan family loves cooking for relatives.
4. | am able to earn money by working in the campus library.

b) Underline the infinitives in each sentence.
1. Zain goes to his grandmother's house to eat homemade sweets.
2. The purpose of the class was to teach children how to swim.
3. The hostess asked Jamil to refill the custard bowl.
4. To clean the house seemed like an impossible task.
5. Doris was asked to host the function.

Infinitives

are verbals that are formed
using the base form of a
verb with the word “to”
before it. it can function as
nouns, adjectives, or
adverbs

Example: | went to the story to buy

some groceries.

Im this sentence, “to buy some

groceries” is an infinitive phrase that
functions as the purpose of the action
expressed by the main verb “went”.

c) Complete the following sentences using the past or past participle form of the

verb given in the brackets.
1. They were badly ...........
2. Recently the prices of essential commodities haVe «00000
Sa FU tains . us good-bye. (bid)
4s sscicenersessseonsn him up last night. (ring)
5. | will carefully ss

«... in the battle. (beat)

my duty. (do)

17

«+. UP. (gO)

--- PAGE 18 ---
' d) Aspect of time (correctly used in speech and writing)
TENSE versus ASPECT

ense indicates the Aspect indicates how

location of an action or : an action, state or an

event is related to the
flow of time.

+
}

an event in time.

There are two tenses There are four aspects
in English: past and in English: simple,
present. progressive, perfect
and progressive
perfect.

Tense is a major Aspect is a sub-

grammatical category. of tense,
category.

Activity: For each sentence, identify the verb tense (past, present, future) and the time
period it refers to (specific point in time, ongoing, habitual).

1. | woke up early this morning. (Tense: i, Time:
)

. We usually go to the park on weekends. (Tense: ss, Time?

)

. She will be traveling to Europe next summer. (Tense: ___— Si, Time:

)

. The train leaves every hour on the scheduled time. (Tense: _ , Time:

)

. They were working on a project when | arrived. (Tense: oe
) >

a) Editing and proofreading skills to a range of different texts and contexts

Editing and proofreading skills are essential for ensuring clear, accurate, and polished
communication across a wide range of texts and contexts.

--- PAGE 19 ---
4

Editing:

e Formal Writing: Academic papers,
business proposals, reports, and essays
require meticulous editing to ensure
proper grammar, punctuation, and
adherence to style guides (e.g., APA,
MLA, Chicago). An editor would check
for clarity, flow, and logical structure.

¢ Creative Writing: Novels, poems, and
short stories benefit from editing that
focuses on enhancing the author's
voice, strengthening sentence
structure, and ensuring consistency in
tone and character development.

¢ Technical Writing: Manuals, instructions, and user guides require editing for accuracy,
technical correctness, and conciseness. The editor should ensure the information is easy
to understand for the target audience.

* Marketing and Advertising: Editing marketing copy involves ensuring clear messaging,
persuasive language, and adherence to brand voice and target audience.

* Social Media and Web Content: Editing for online content focuses on readability, keyword
optimization, and error-free communication while maintaining the platform's specific

style.
Proofreading:

Proofreading is the final step, focusing on catching surface-level errors after the editing process.
This includes:

¢ Grammar and Punctuation: Misspelled words, incorrect verb tenses, punctuation
mistakes, and subject-verb agreement issues.

* Formatting: Inconsistency in font size, spacing, margins, and adherence to style guides.

¢ Factual Accuracy: Checking dates, figures, and proper names for accuracy.

Teacher's Note
* Ask students to analyse how an author's choices concerning how to structure specific
parts of a text (e.g., the choice of where to begin or end a story, the choice to provide a
comedic or tragic resolution) contribute to its overall structure and meaning as well as
its aesthetic impact.

* Help them to evaluate the particular elements of a story or drama (e.g., how the setting
shapes the characters or plot)

ew eeee

19

--- PAGE 20 ---
Activity:

| Instructions:
1. Read the following passage carefully.

| 2. Identify any errors in grammar, punctuation, verb, spelling, or sentence structure
! and rewrite the paragraph.

'

'

Passage:
maria’'s cat fluffy were always getting into mischief one day he sneaked into the neighbors
garden and dug up their vegetables maria had to apologise profusely and pay for the

' damages after that she decided to keep fluffy indoors more often to avoid any more
| problems

a ene

b) Multiple paragraphs essays/stories; multi stanza poems or play script using mechanics
of correct writing

The Mechanics of Writing [aaa
* Spelling, grammar, capitalization/punctuation and x =
hancdwritery mast te addressed

* Best taught through direct instruction, practiced and
used within the context of authentic writing
experiences

* Often embedded in the Writing Workshop

* May be taught in isolated lessons

* Observe students’ needs-what mechanics are weak and
need more focus?

* Give students opportunities to use, apply and improve
mechanics within their own writing =A

Activity:

Using all necessary types of tenses correctly and elements of story writing, write a story
on handling issues and Sarg responsibilities in our daily life.

me en ee eee

20

--- PAGE 21 ---
by Lubna Naz
4 Published in. Dawnjon: July 14

After completing this lesson, you will be able to:

use complex questions for a range of audiences

ask and answer higher-order questions to guide/assess reading(e.g., Why is the author saying
this right now? Why did the author choose this word? How is this different from what | read
somewhere else?

analyse organisational patterns in a text:

a. list/ sequence of ideas/ events comparison-contrast

b. cause-effect

c. problem-solution

d. reasons/ assumptions-conclusion

demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written communication in
varying degrees of complexity.

comprehend and use contemporary Idioms and proverbs in the different texts and in their
speech.

produce clear and coherent writing in which the development, organization, and style are
appropriate to the task, purpose, and audience.

--- PAGE 22 ---
© Pre-reading
a) How does population explosion affect the economy of a country?

b) Whichplan should be adopted to create awareness among masses against this threat?

As Pakistan's population surges past 240
million, the nation grapples with a
demographic crisis demanding urgent
reforms to stave off the looming threats of
poverty and inequality.

Imagine a world with just five billion people.
It was on July 11, 1987, when this milestone
was reached, marking the first World
Population Day (WPD). Fast forward to 2023,
and our planet now teems with a staggering
eight billion inhabitants. This explosive
growth shines a light on the pressing challenges and opportunities that come with such a rapidly
expanding global population, impacting sustainable development, health, and well-being.

In the heart of this numerical growth lies South Asia, home to over 2.2 billion people. Among these
nations, India leads with a population of 1.4 billion, followed by Pakistan's 240 million, and
Bangladesh's 172 million. These figures are not just numbers; they are the pulse of a region
undergoing significant demographic shifts, demanding urgent and effective policies to manage
these changes.

Pakistan, in particular, faces an astounding scenario. The quality of human resources is under
strain, resources are stretched thin to meet the growing demands, and the nation remains
vulnerable to extremism and climate change shocks.

Literally speaking over population arises when the resources in a country fall short of meeting the
needs of its people. Since its inception Pakistan had to face the problems of illiteracy, poverty,
pollution, unemployment, lawlessness and terrorism, inflation, loans, corruption, defective tax
structure, government instability and many more serious threats. Unless we control our
population increase, these elated problems will not be easily solved.

From 2010 to 2015, Pakistan's population increase rate
stood 69pc higher than that of Turkey, Iran, India, Indonesia,
and Bangladesh. Today, its increase rate of 3.6 remains the
highest in South Asia, painting a rather bleak picture of its
demographic reality.

It is, therefore, imperative to scrutinise policies that have failed to curb skyrocketing population
growth.

Even after 74 years of its growth, Pakistan is still struggling to find a respectable place in the
comity of nations. All the efforts made in the past seem to have gone in vain. Every sector of life
today tells a sorry tale. The problem that could be blamed for this bad state of affairs is over
population in the country. Over population emerges as the main villain in Pakistan for a number of
reasons. Pakistan's progress, though commendable, is a tale of uneven strides.

While-reading

How does population arise?

22

--- PAGE 23 ---
Birth rate is the most common indicator that the countries today use to keep a check on over
population. Pakistan today suffers from a high birth rate in the country and we must be mindful of
it. Aserious thought should be given today to the factors which have translated the high birth rate
into over population. The advancements in the medical field have led to a sharp decline in the
death rate.

The life expectancy has increased due to the use of improved health technologies. So the decline
in death rate has in other words led
to the problem of over population.
Pakistan is a developing country
and like many other countries, it is
trying hard to survive in the
developed world. A huge population of over 180 million that could have been an asset, is today a
huge liability. Fast increasing population is thus a source of constant danger to Pakistan.

Over population has badly hampered the economic growth in the country. This leads to a decline
in the purchasing power of the people. As the demand for the goods decreases, then by “demand
and supply” law, the investment in the country also suffers. Such a stagnant economy will lead to
Closing of factories and businesses, and in return add to joblessness and poverty. Even if the
country is somehow successful in attracting foreign investments, still over population will not
allow these investments to have a positive effect on country’s economy. Greater population
means a greater number of hungry souls to feed.

Agriculture is also adversely affected by the rapid increase of over population. More population
means smaller farms, and leads to a decline in productivity. People having small farms have no
choice but to migrate in hope of a better life. This leads to urbanization, which itself is a major
problem.

Many social evils like lawlessness, crime and corruption are all the result of over population. The
fight over resources has divided the society into two groups i.e. those who have all and are not
willing to share it and second group that is fighting for its mere survival. The fight between haves
and have-nots has the seeds of conflict in it, which, if erupted could imperil the peace and order
in society. Over population has also contributed to toxic pollution. A greater number of vehicles
on the roads means the emitting of poisonous gas for people to inhale. Sewage problem and lack
of clean drinking water can also be attributed to the population problem.

Proper measures and decisions should be taken to ensure increase in our literacy rate. In 2016-
17, 13.7pc of children aged 10-17 were trapped in child labour, as reported by the International
Labour Organisation. What's more alarming is that 5.4pc of these children were engaged in
hazardous work which endangered their lives and futures, This exploitation isn't just a tragedy for
the children — it’s a ticking time bomb for the country’s workforce — setting the stage for a
generation of illiterate and unskilled laborers.

The United Nations Children's Fund (Unicef) sheds light on an even darker reality; 22.8 million
children between the ages of five and 16 are out of school in Pakistan. Instead of learning in
classrooms, these kids are toiling away in car mechanic shops, selling vegetables on street
corners, or begging for their next meal. This dire situation is alarming and needs to be addressed
on priority basis to educate and aware children of the importance of education.

While-reading
What is the reason of a sharp decline in the death rate?

23

--- PAGE 24 ---
The unchecked population growth, coupled with inadequate planning, spells disaster for a
country already strained by scarce resources, a rising debt burden, poor growth, and
development scenarios. This precarious situation heightens disappointment and fuels hatred.

The role of media can help a lot in bringing awareness among masses. With most of the population
of illiterate people, electronic media can prove to be a huge success in getting the message
across. Print media too needs to emphasize the problem of over population on a more regular
basis.

According to a report by Population Action International Washington, a great reason for
population increase in Pakistan is that the Government has made a very insignificant investment
in social sector. It is a very serious problem because it leads to frustration, which means chaos.
Chaos means danger to state.

The problem must be tackled pragmatically. Otherwise our dream of a bright and glorious future
will just remain a wish. Astrong Pakistan should be our top priority, and if we have to make certain
hard decisions, no one should hesitate to co-operate. Pakistan comes first even before our
personal vested interests.

Pakistan stands at a crossroads. The future of the nation depends on it. Addressing these
multifaceted challenges is not just an option — it’s a necessity.

The population is divided into three basic groups.

6 to- 14 years 15 to 64 years 64 years and above

= Post-reading

What is needed to implement the checks to over population?

Reference (Dawn 11 July 2024 Theme: Population Education)

The theme is to influence challenges which occur due to over-population, understand the
impact and take measures accordingly.

o-

Sim!

synonyms

perce = a
= Meanings=

Si
a Es

capable of being attacked, damaged

saggerng—fesoniing |
sustainable viable, continual

24

vulnerabl

--- PAGE 25 ---
analytical, numerical
overwhelming, stunningly surprising

analyze, to inquire, inspect
courteousness, civility

at an important point of someone's life

per - to prevent someone from easily doing something
stagnant dormant, inactive, static

full of risk, perilous, unhealthy
meager, lacking

Comprehension

a) Answer the following question.

Describe the indicator affecting the challenges and opportunities of population growth.
Identify the astounding scenario of Pakistan regarding population growth.

Explain the importance to scrutinise policies that curb population growth.

Assess the hampering of economic growth by over population.

Write down the social evils which are the result of over population.

‘Demand’ and ‘supply’ formula plays an important role in the economy of a country, Devise a
plan to resolve this issue.

Describe the ticking time bomb for the country’s work force.
How can the role of media bring awareness among people?

ou bh Wr

oN

b) Circle the correct meaning of the following words.

--- PAGE 26 ---
sexe = “ Be «sei ee S
Unit 2: Population Explosion in Pakistan

c) Analyse Organisational Patterns in a Text

Patterns of Organization

Description,
Explanation

To analyze organizational patterns in a text, you typically look at how the author structures the
information.

1. Chronological: Information is presented in the order it occurred, often using time
markers like “first,” “then,” “next,” etc. This pattern*is common in historical texts,
biographies, and process essays.

2. Spatial: Information is organized based on physical location or arrangement. This
pattern is common in descriptive writing, travel guides, and spatial analysis.

3. Cause and Effect: This pattern explores the relationship between events, actions, or
phenomena. It presents causes followed by their effects or vice versa. Signal words
might include “because,” "consequently," "as a result,” etc.

4. Problem and Solution: The text presents a problem or issue and then proposes one or
more solutions. This pattern is common in persuasive essays, policy papers, and articles
addressing social issues.

5. Compare and Contrast: Information is presented by highlighting similarities and
differences between two or more subjects. Signal words might include “similarly,” “in
contrast,” "on the other hand,” etc.

6. Classification and Division: Information is organized into categories, subcategories, or
groups based on shared characteristics. This pattern is common in scientific
classification, taxonomies, and organizational structures.

7. Sequential or Process: Similar to chronological, but focuses specifically on the steps or
stages in a process or procedure. This pattern is common in instructional writing,
technical manuals, and recipes. .

8. Problem-Solution: This pattern outlines a problem or issue and then presents one or
more solutions. It's commonly used in persuasive writing, policy proposals, and
argumentative essays.

9. Topical or General-to-Specific: The text starts with a broad overview and then narrows

down to specific details or examples. This pattern is common in academic essays,
research papers, and some types of journalism.

26

--- PAGE 27 ---
Unit 2: Population Explosion in Pakistan

Activity: Analyze the organizational patterns in text of this unit and gather the
relevant information:

a. list/ sequence of ideas/events comparison-contrast
b. cause-effect

c. problem-solution

d. reasons/ assumptions-conclusion

¢ Discuss how some communities are experiencing the effects of population growth, such
as lack of food and space. Same can be said for housing. Over population also puts
pressure on the environment. ‘

¢ What can we do to minimize the impact of population growth?

e Make groups to discuss this drastic population increase since the inception of Pakistan.
¢ Discuss the cause of this population increase, and how can it be taken care of.

¢ Compare and contrast the population of Pakistan with India, China, Malaysia.

Inference
1. Do you think illiteracy affects the economy of a country?
2. Will it be advisable to limit the size of the family?

Vocabulary and Grammar

a) Parts of speech in oral and written communication in varying degrees are as given under,

Parts of Speech

Parts of speech are the fundamental building blocks of language, and understanding their roles is
crucial for effective communication.

i Veet ee

° Seam owns a fastest car
* They decided to buy = house
*e | believe in free spe

Naming ecinke. taatek.
things & ideas/concepts”
Adjectives pronoun nouns and Angin boy wae re mber sha pp
. Sis we iong r tl
Adverbs * They are extremely happy
[Adverts adjectves & adverbs ° The driver arrived very quick!
Uartse Expressing a physical ederer plays tennis.
action or state ig
Showing relationships of
ereposions words and phrases

27

He went into the room
rm sgomstcoting ate :

_ Why did 700 tev me?” ek pay
~ Please look after yourself _

--- PAGE 28 ---
He's tall 9 slim
Conjunctions ee words, phrases & I'll wait.) she arrives
uses Tom's sick _. he’s not here

R Z , that’s :
Interjections Showing song emovons , that really hurt
or feelings : ites mre wear dole?

Why are the parts of speech important?

These building blocks allow us to construct sentences and communicate complete ideas. Each
part of speech plays a specific role. They also unlock more advanced grammar and writing
concepts.

As we move into a little bit more advanced English lessons about sentence structure, we will start
to discuss the different types of sentences, like complex sentences, simple sentences, and
compound sentences. It also includes how to identify the direct object and indirect object of a
sentence. There is also a difference between an independent clause and a dependent clause and
a difference between a main verb and a helping verb.

This might all seem like boring grammar topics now, but learning all of these building blocks will
make your life so much easier when you try to speak and write fluently in English.

Proper sentence structure

The order words appear in a sentence depends on their part of speech. Knowing if a word is a
noun, verb, adjective, etc. allows you tostructure sentences properly.

For example, English sentences often follow a subject-verb-object order. The subject is usually a
noun or pronoun, the verb is an action word, and the object receives the action. Parts of speech
tell you which words play those roles.

Using the right sentence structure makes your writing clear, coherent, and easy to understand.
Correct punctuation

Punctuation like periods, commas, and semicolons belong in certain places around parts of
speech.
For instance, commas go between items in a list of adjectives. Periods indicate the end of a

sentence containing a subject and predicate. Knowing parts of speech guides you to use
punctuation correctly.

Proper punctuation makes writing flow smoothly and conveys ideas clearly.

More engaging writing style

Relying too much on one part of speech makes writing boring. Overusing nouns and verbs leads to
arepetitive, unsophisticated style.

Varying your parts of speech adds flavor to your writing. Well-placed adjectives and adverbs add
vivid description. Astrategically used interjection can grab the reader's attention.

Understanding parts of speech unlocks your ability to craft more engaging prose.
improved reading comprehension

When reading, identifying the role each word plays as a part of speech helps you analyze the text
critically. :

28

--- PAGE 29 ---
Seeing how the author uses nouns, verbs, adjectives, and other parts of speech provides deeper
insight into the meaning. It allows you to discern subtleties and patterns that create a richer
reading experience.
Simple Communication:

* Oral: “Hi! Myname is Kamran. (Noun) I can help you today. (Verb)”

+ Written: "The cat sat on the mat. (Noun, Preposition, Noun)”
Descriptive Communication:

+ Oral: "Wow, that (Interjection) sunset is (Adjective)! The fiery orange and purple hues
(Adjectives) create a breathtaking view. (Adverb)"”

+ Written: “The ancient (Adjective) castle loomed on the hilltop (Noun), its crumbling
(Adjective) towers are a stark contrast to the vibrant (Adjective) wildflowers blanketing
the slopes below. (Adverb)”

Complex Communication:

* Oral: “While artificial intelligence has revolutionized (Verb) many industries, it's
important to consider the ethical implications (Noun) as well. (Conjunction) On the one
hand, it can improve efficiency, but on the other hand, it raises questions about job
displacement. (Conjunction)"”

+ Written: “Although the protagonist's journey was fraught with peril (Noun), her
determination (Noun) and resourcefulness (Noun) ultimately led her to triumph (Verb).
(Conjunction) The story serves as a powerful reminder that even in the face of ay,
Renee nares can prevail. (Conjunction)”

Activity: Write a sentence for each of the eight parts of speech:
Noun:

Verb:

Adjective:

Adverb:

Pronoun:
Preposition:

Conjunction:

Interjection:

b) Comprehend and use contemporary Idioms and proverbs in the different texts and in their
speech
Idioms:

An idiom is a phrase or expression whose meaning is not predictable from the usual meanings of its
constituent elements, often having a figurative rather than literal meaning. Idioms are unique to

29

--- PAGE 30 ---
specific languages or cultures and are commonly used in everyday speech. They often add color,
humor, or emphasis to language.

Example: “Kick the bucket" is an idiom meaning “to die.” Its literal meaning would suggest
physically kicking a bucket, but its actual meaning is understood within the context of the idiom
itself.

Proverbs:

Aproverb is a short, well-known saying that imparts wisdom, advice, or a universal truth based on
common sense or cultural experience. Proverbs are often handed down through generations and
encapsulate societal values and beliefs. They are meant to provide guidance or convey moral
lessons.

Example: "A stitch in time saves nine” is a proverb advising that addressing a problem early can
prevent it from becoming larger or more difficult to solve later.

IDIOMS VS PROVERBS
Idioms are a fixed « pression that contain | Proverb is a short, well know saying that
a figurative sas , DAS (set contains an advice.
Proverb contains a moral or an advice based

eer dt ahi er tT vt Proverbs can be understood even if you are
oS’ ¢ hearing it for the first time.

familiar with it.
Activity: In this unit we will learn to make sentences with the contemporary
idioms. Make meaningful sentences after using these idioms given below.

Hit the nail on the head: To do or say something exactly right.

Piece of cake: Something very easy to do.

Break the ice: To initiate conversation in a social setting.

Bite the bullet: To endure a painful or difficult situation with courage.
Cost an arm and a leg: To be very expensive.

On cloud nine: To be extremely happy.

Cut to the chase: To get to the point without wasting time.
.Burn the midnight oil: To work late into the night.

Break the bank: ~ To spend more money than one can afford.

Jump on the bandwagon: To join or support something that is already popular.

A piece of the pie: Ashare of something, usually profits or benefits.

Beat around the bush: To avoid addressing the main topic; to speak indirectly.
Let the cat out of the bag: To reveal a secret.

Take it with a grain of salt: To not take something too seriously; to be skeptical.
Hit the sack: To go to bed.

A dime a dozen: Something very common or easy to obtain.

Get cold feet: _To suddenly become nervous or hesitant.

--- PAGE 31 ---
Clear and coherent writing in which the development, organization, and style are
appropriate to the task, purpose, and audience.

Writing that is both clear and cohesive is
necessary to effectively communicate 2
concepts, details, or arguments toa)
particular audience. e
Clarity: Easy reading for the target |
audience is a sign of clear writing. It stays |”
clear of jargon, ambiguity, and =
complicated language. Clear writing *

ensures that readers Understand the | *
intended message without difficulty by 7S.
using simple language, accurate | ©
terminology, and logicalexplanations. |

Coherence: Writing that is coherent
builds a coherent story or argument by
making sense transitions between concepts. Coherent writing keeps tone, style, and
structure constant throughout the text, allowing readers to navigate the information
easily and logically. By indicating changes in topic or emphasis, transitions between
paragraphs and sections aid in the coherence of the text.

Development: Well-developed writing goes in-depth into the selected subject or thesis
and offers enough proof, examples, and analysis to back up its assertions. Development is
the process of arranging concepts logically, building on earlier ideas to produce a |
thorough comprehension of the topic at hand. Every paragraph advances the main
concept farther, highlighting the author's intent and piquing the reader's curiosity.
Structure: Writing that is well-organized has a distinct outline that improves reading
comprehension. To do this and to help readers navigate the content, headings,
_ subheadings, and bullet points may be used to break up the text. Depending on the type
of writing assignment, effective organization also entails placing data in a logical order,
either chronologically, spatially, or thematically.

Appropriateness to Task, Purpose, and Audience: Writing is adapted to satisfy the
particular demands of the assignment, fulfill the purpose that is intended, and connect
with the intended audience. This entails taking into account aspects including the writing
task's aims and objectives in addition to the audience's demographics, past knowledge,
and expectations. The appropriate adjustments are made to the style, tone, and
formality level to guarantee efficacy and relevancy.

31

--- PAGE 32 ---
—- i UEnEIEE EN IEEnEnnnemeeee nena

.

a) Activity: Read the following passage and answer the questions below based on the
principles of clear and coherent writing.

Passage:

“Many people today have concerns about the environment. There are various environmental
issues that need to be addressed. These issues include pollution, deforestation, and climate
change. Pollution is harmful to the environment. Deforestation involves the cutting down of
trees. Climate change is a global issue."

Questions:

Clarity:

a) Identify any ambiguous or unclear phrases in the passage.

b) Rewrite one unclear sentence to improve clarity.

Coherence: ‘

a) Does the passage flow logically from one idea to the next? Why or why not?
b) Identify any transitions that could improve the coherence of the passage.
Development:

a) Does the passage provide sufficient detail and explanation about the environmental issues
mentioned?

b) Suggest one additional detail or example that could enhance the development of the
passage.

Organization:

a) Describe the overall organization of the passage. Is it effectively structured?

b) Propose one way to reorganize the passage to improve its clarity and coherence.

b) Writing a Clear and Coherent Essay

« Choose a topic related to environmental conservation, such as recycling, renewable
energy, or endangered species.

« Write an essay (approximately 5 paragraphs) about the chosen topic, ensuring clarity
and coherence in your writing.

* Pay attention to the organization of your paragraph, use of transitions, and
development of ideas to create a well-structured and cohesive piece of writing.

e Review and revise your essay to improve clarity, coherence, and overall effectiveness.

Teacher's Note
* Help students to ask and answer higher-order questions to guide/assess reading(e.g., Why is the
author saying this right now? Why did the author choose this word? How is this different from what
tread somewhere else?
Encourage them to demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written
communication in varying degrees of complexity.
Let them comprehend and use contemporary Idioms and proverbs in the different texts and in

their speech.
Encourage them to produce clear and coherent writing in which the development, organization,
and style are appropriate to the task, purpose, and audience.

--- PAGE 33 ---
THE INCOME-TAX MAN

Mark Twain (1835-1910)

After completing this lesson, you will be able to:

engage in extended discussions and critique taking into account other speakers’ viewpoints and
presenting one’s own with clarity and coherence.

analyse how an author's choices concerning how to structure specific parts of a text (e.g., the
choice of where to begin or end a story, the choice to provide a comedic or tragic resolution)
contribute to its overall structure and meaning as well as its aesthetic impact

use pre-reading and while-reading strategies to analyze and explore different layers of meaning
with in texts including biases and opinions.

provide an objective summary of a range of texts.

demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written communication in
varying degrees of complexity.

identify and use compound prev ositions and prepositional phrases in writing

use summary skills to write an objective summary of the given text and poems.

--- PAGE 34 ---
©} Pre-Reading
a) Whyare we socially and morally obligated to pay our taxes honestly?
b) Would you like to be apart of the tax collection system? Explain. —
The first notice that was taken of me, when | “settled down” recently, was by a gentleman who
said he was an assessor, a word that | did not understand very well. | said | had never heard of his
branch of business before, but | was very glad to see him in spite of that_would he settle down? He
sat down. | did'not have anything particular to say, but | felt that people, who have arrived at the
important position of keeping a house, must be conversational, must be easy and friendly in
society. So, as | could think of nothing else to say, | asked him if he was opening his shop in our
neighborhood. He said he was. (I did not wish to appear to know nothing, but | had hoped he would
mention what he had for sale.)

How is trade?” | asked him and he said, “Fair”. While-reading

| then said we would visit his shop and if we liked | write the narrator talks and the visitor
it as well as any other, we would give him our
business.

\
|
i
|

laughs, what is the narrator thinking about?

He said he thought we would like his place of business well enough, to use no other- he said he had
ever met anybody who would go off and hunt up another man, in the same kind of business, after
trading with him once. That sounded rather too confident, but the man looked honest enough.

| do not know how it happened exactly, but gradually we appeared to become more friendly in our
conversation and then everything went along very comfortably. We talked and talked and talked-
at least | did; and we laughed and laughed and laughed-at least he did.

But all the time my mind worked hard. | was determined to find out all about his business in spite
of his mysterious answers, and | was determined that | would get it out of him, without him
knowing, what I was doing. | intend to trap him with a deep , deep trick. | would tell him all about
my business and he would naturally grow to be like me so much that he would forget to be careful,
and he would tell me all about his affair before he realized what! was trying to do.

| thought of saying to him, “Sir, you little know what a clever person you are dealing with.” But |
said: “Now you would never get how much money | made, giving talks to people this winter, and
last spring”. “No-I don't believe | could, to save my life. Let me see-let me see. About two
thousand dollars, perhaps? But no; no, sir, | know you couldn't have made so much as that. Say
seventeen hundred?

“Hal Hal | knew you couldn't guess. | received for my talks last spring, and this winter, fourteen
thousand seven hundred fifty dollars. What you think of that?”

“Well, it’s very surprising-that’s a very large amount of money. | will make a note of it. And you say
even this wasn't all?”

“ALU! My dear sir, there was my income from the newspaper-The Daily Warwhoop-about-about-
well what would you say to about eight thousand dollars for example?”

“Say! Well, | say | should like to see myself rolling in just such an ocean of money. Eight thousand!
I'll make a note of it. Well, man!-And in addition to all this, am | to understand that you had still
more.

a —

34

--- PAGE 35 ---
“Hal Hal Hal You're only at the beginning of it. | wrote a book-The Innocence Abroad price three
and a half to five dollars, according to the cover. Listen to me. Look me in the eye. During the last
four months and a half we've sold ninety-five thousand copies of that book. Ninety-five thousand!
Think of it. Average four dollars a copy, perhaps. It’s nearly four hundred thousand dollars, my
dear sir, | get half”.

“Good Heavens! I'll write that down. Fourteen-seven-fifty---eight---two hundred. Total, about
-well, | can hardly believe it_ the total is about two hundred and thirteen or fourteen thousand
dollars! Is that possible?”

While-reading
“Possible! If there is any mistake, it's
the other way. It's more. Two hundred | How does the narrator feel when the visitor stands
and fourteen thousand is my income for \up without telling anything about his business?
this year, if | know how to add up.”

Then the’ gentleman got up to go and handed mea large envelope, and said that t contained
everything. | might like to know about his business would in fact be proud to have the business of a
man with such a large income.

As soon as he had gone, | opened his envelope. | studied the papers carefully. | then called the
cook and said! “Hold me while | faint”.

Ah, what an evil man he was! His envelope contained nothing in the world, except a form on which
to report my income, for the purpose of income tax, a long list of impolite questions about my
private affairs, filling the best part of four long pages of small print questions, | may say, formed
with such wonderful skill, that’s the oldest and wisest

man in the world couldn't understand the meaning of | While-reading

most of them_questions, too, that were designed to | what does the narrator find inside
make a report about four times his actual income, to \ the envelope the visitor gives him?
stop himself telling a lie. | looked for a way out of my
troubles, but there did not appear to be any. |

Inquiry number 1 covered my case generously and completely. | know a very wealthy man whose
’ house is a palace, who spends a great deal, but a man who as no income, as | have often noticed
when looking at the list of taxes paid by other citizens. And | went tohim for advice.

He took my papers, picked up his pen and suddenly, | was a very poor man. It was the neatest thing
that ever was. He did it simply by cleverly arranging the list of allowances. He wrote down my
“state, national and city taxes” as so much; my “losses by flood, fire and so on” as so much; my
“losses on sales of property”, and “animals sold”, on “payments for rent of home”, on “repairs
and improvements” as so much. He wrote down “salary, already axed, as an officer of the United
States army or other services” as so much. He wrote down other things. He found unbelievable
amounts to set against my income from each one of these allowances each and every one of them.
And when he had finished he handed me the paper, and | saw immediately that during the year my
income, as my profits, had been one thousand two hundred and fifty dollars and forty cents.

“Now, he said, “The thousand dollars i is free from tax by law. What you must do is to go and swear
that this information is true and then pay tax on the two hundred and fifty dollars.” (While he was -
making this speech, his little boy, Willie lifted a two_dollar note out of his pocket and
disappeared, and | feel quite sure that if my stranger went to see that little sie tomorrow the boy
would tell lies about his income.)

35

--- PAGE 36 ---
“Do you, said |, do you always arrange the allowances in this way for your own income, sir?”

“Well, of course. If we did not have these eleven questions under the heading of allowances, |
would become a beggar every year in order to support this hateful and evil, this cruel and terrible
government. This gentleman stands very high among the very best of the rich men of the city the
* men of moral value, of high business standards, of great social standing-and so accepted his
suggestion. | went down to the tax office, and under the cold eyes of my previous visitor | stood up
* and swore to the after lie, trick after trick, under my soul was coated with a thick layer of lies and
my self-respect was gone forever.

© Post-reading
What does the narrator decide to do from then on about his income?

Notes and Comments

Mark Twain was the pen name of Samuel Langhorne Clemens (1835-1910). He was one of
America’s greatest and most beloved writers. He had travelled widely, and was a man of many | °
talents, known for his outspoken opinions and humour of which, “The Income-Tax Man” is a fine
example. “There is no one who does not exaggerate, “Ralph Waldo Emerson has said, but there

is no one who did it as well as Mark Twain. Besides addressing serious issues, he has left a legacy
of joy and laughter. «

Theme

The Income Tax Man is a typical example of placing a burning social issue at a high pedestal for
the readers. After reading it the curiosity arises to be a part of the system. The story holds the
reader's interest all along on a subject that concerns almost every citizen.

Glossary

Words Meanings Synonyms

one who calculates the value/cost of something to establish a charge
or the amount to be paid

cold-eyes . not friendly, without emotion

conversational adopt a conversational manner

a quantity too small to make any improvement
mysterious difficult to understand or explain eens eno

36

--- PAGE 37 ---
a) Answer the following question.

1

co On fF WwW sk WwW NS

What is the author's first impression of the visitor?

Do the opening lines of the unit contain any hidden implication? Describe briefly.
Why did he start asking the stranger about his business?

Is the author against paying taxes or just criticizing people who do not pay taxes?
Why did the author call his cook and say “Hold me while | faint?”

In what way was the author able to save income tax?

What did the envelope contain?

How was the author able to save income tax?

Whatis your impression about the “very best of the rich men of the city”?

b) Complete the blanks by using the appropriate answers.

1. lwas__ ss SS _stto find out alll about his business in spite of his
answers.
2. 1 to trap him with a deep, deep trick.
3. The gentleman___—. sito. go. and handed me a large envelope, and said that
? everything.
4. Hefound_ CCS amounts to sett against my income fro::: each one of
these__ = = each arn every one of them.
5. “Now, he said, “The thousand dollars is free from by law. What you must do
istogoand__ sé this: information is true and then pay tax on the

two hundred and fifty dollars.”

c) Analyse through the story “The Income Tax Man” that how an author's choices concerning
how to structure specific parts of a text means how did the story begin or ended. Whether the
choice was to provide a comedic or tragic resolution and how did it contribute to its overall
structure and meaning as well as its aesthetic impact,

Engage in extended discussions and critique taking into account other speakers’ viewpoints
and presenting one's own with clarity and coherence.

Engaging in extended discussions and critiques is a valuable skill that allows us to explore
complex issues, learn from others, and refine our own thinking.

1. Active Listening and Understanding Viewpoints:

Pay close attention: This means not just waiting for your turn to speak, but truly absorbing
the other person's arguments and reasoning.

Acknowledge their perspective: Show them you've heard them by summarizing their key
points or concerns. Phrases like "That's an important point" or “| understand where you're
coming from” establish a foundation for respectful dialogue.

37

--- PAGE 38 ---
2. Presenting Your Own Perspective Clearly:

e Articulate your ideas: Once you've acknowledged the other speaker, it's your turn to
‘ present your stance. Clearly state your position and support it with evidence or logical
reasoning.

e Use examples and illustrations: Real-world, scenarios or data can make your argument
more relatable and impactful.
3. Building on Ideas Through Collaboration:

¢ Find common ground: Look for areas of agreement, even if minor. This can help establish
a sense of teamwork in exploring the issue.

¢ Explore solutions together: Instead of simply opposing each other, see if you can
brainstorm solutions that address both perspectives. This collaborative approach can lead
to more creative and nuanced solutions.

4. Maintaining Respectful Discourse:

e Focus on ideas, not personalities: Even when disagreeing, avoid personal attacks or
insults. Critique the argument, not the person making it.

¢« Acknowledge limitations: Be open to the possibility that you might not have all the
answers. Show your willingness to learn from others.

e Use a professional tone: This means avoiding overly emotional language or dismissive
phrases.
Additional Considerations:

¢ Consider the context: The level of formality and the specific topic will influence your
communication style.

® Be mindful of nonverbal cues: Maintain eye contact, use open body language, and avoid
interrupting to establish rapport and show you're engaged.

° Ask clarifying questions: If something is unclear, don't hesitate to ask for clarification.
This ensures you're both on the same page and avoids misunderstandings.

Activity: Engage in a nuanced discussion about the benefits and potential
drawbacks of paying taxes.

Preparation:
1 Brainstorm individually: Before the discussion, take 5 minutes to write down your
thoughts on the following questions:
a. What are the main benefits of paying taxes? (Think infrastructure, social
programs, etc.)
b. Are there any situations where taxes seem unfair or inefficient?
c. How can the tax system be improved to be more equitable?

38

--- PAGE 39 ---
2 Choose roles (optional): For an added layer of complexity, choose roles for the
discussion. Here are some options:

Taxpayer Advocate
Government Official
Economist

Business Owner
Social Worker

Ser - P

Grammar and Vocabulary

Parts of speech

Noun “a

Noun is the name of aperson ,place or thing. For example:Apple, Ali ,chair, book ,house,etc.

Proper Nouns

Specific names of f ) me: r ae tae
patbla, place, ha sense counted and have
roa » or ines 4 Six;tlar and plural

ngs
E.g. John, London, |} -

Write three examples for these following parts of speech.
Proper Noun

Common Noun

Compound Noun ___

Collective Noun _-

Concrete Noun

Abstract Noun

--- PAGE 40 ---
Phrasal Verbs are combinations of a verb and one or more particles (prepositions or adverbs)
that, when used together, create a meaning different from the individual words. They are
widely used in English and can be challenging to master due to their idiomatic nature.

Types of Phrasal Verbs
1. Transitive Phrasal Verbs: Require an object.
o Example: She gave up her job.
2. Intransitive Phrasal Verbs: Do not require an object.
o Example: He woke up late.
3. Separable Phrasal Verbs: The object can come between the verb and the particle.
o Example: She turned off the lights. or She turned the lights off.
4. \Inseparable Phrasal Verbs: The verb and particle cannot be separated.
o Example: We ran into an old friend.
Commonly used Phrasal verbs
Learn and practice these commonly used phrasal verbs in your daily routine.

Example Sentence
Stop functioning The car broke down on the highway.

Bring up Mention or raise a topic She brought up the issue in the
meeting.

Call off Cancel something The match was called off due to rain.
Discover information |.need to find out where he lives.
Quit or stop trying Don't give up on your dreams. :

Take care of someone or I'm looking after my younger brother
something today. '

Look forward | Anticipate something with I'm looking forward to the holidays.
to excitement

Postpone or delay The meceling was put off until next
week.
‘Meet unexpectedly | ran into my teacher at the mall.

Take off Remove clothing or leave the The plane took off on time.
ground
Turn down Reject an offer or request She turned down the job offer.

Exercise or find a solution They finally worked out their
differences.
Reconcile or inyent a story They made up after their argument.

Back out She backed out of the agreement last
minute.

Cut down on_ | Reduce the amount of something | You should cut down on sugar. ‘

pas
8
x
=
co
o
ban |

=
§| 2

40

--- PAGE 41 ---
Writing
Summary skills to write an objective summary

a) Summary Skills

A summary is a brief statement or restatement of main points, especially as a conclusion to a
work: a summary of a chapter. A brief is a detailed outline, by heads and subheads, of a discourse
(usually legal) to be completed: a brief for an argument.

How to write a summary

¢ Read the text thoroughly. Read the text several times to ensure you understand
everything about the author's message. ...

¢ Take notes to identify the main idea. ...
¢ Identify the main arguments. ..
¢ Prepare your draft. ...
¢ Write the summary. ...
¢ Quote the author....
* Conclude the summary.
b) Objective Summary

An objective summary is a brief description of a document, video or other piece of media. The
summary quickly describes the main thesis of the work being summarized, along with a few key
supporting points covered in the document. The objective summary allows a reader to assess a
piece of media quickly and decide if they want to examine it in full.

Benefits of Objective Summaries:

¢ Improved Comprehension: By summarizing a text, you solidify your understanding of the
key ideas and relationships between them.

¢ Enhanced Memory Retention: Summarizing helps. consolidate information in your
memory, making it easier to recall later.

¢ Effective Communication: You can use summaries to accurately represent a source when
discussing it with others or writing research papers.

* Critical Thinking: The process of summarizing requires you to analyze the text pre
identify the most important information.

Characteristics:

* Accuracy: An objective summary faithfully represents the original source, reflecting its
main arguments, claims, or events.

¢ Neutrality: It avoids expressing personal opinions, judgments, or biases. The focus is on
presenting the information in a neutral and unbiased manner.
¢ Conciseness: It's a shortened version of the original text, capturing the essence in a
_ fraction of the original length.

* Completeness: While concise, it should still cover the essential supporting details that
explain the main points. Unnecessary information or tangents are excluded.

~-

41

--- PAGE 42 ---
How to Write an Objective Summary:
1. Read actively: Pay close attention to the main points, supporting details, and overall
structure of the text. ;
2. Identify key ideas: Underline or highlight important sentences, phrases, or passages.
3. Focuson the "what" not the "why": Stick to describing the content, not analyzing it.
4. Paraphrase: Use your own words to express the main points, but maintain the original
meaning.
5. Check for accuracy: Ensure your summary accurately reflects the original source and
doesn't introduce any unintended biases.
Applications of Objective Summaries:
® Academic Settings: Summarizing is crucial for studying, note-taking, and writing research
papers. —
* Professional Settings: When presenting information from a report, meeting minutes, or
email chain, an objective summary can be a helpful tool.

® Personal Use: Summarizing articles or books can help you quickly grasp the key takeaways
and decide if further.exploration is needed.

Activity: Use summary skills to write an objective summary of this story “The income
Tax Man”. )

Teacher's Note
- Ask students to engage in extended discussions and critique taking into account other

speakers’ viewpoints and presenting one’s own with clarity and coherence. .

Let them analyse how an author's choices concerning how to structure specific parts of a
text (e.g., the choice of where to begin or enda story, the choice to provide a comedic or
tragic resolution) contribute to its overall structure and meaning as well as its aesthetic
impact

Help them to demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and
written communication in varying degrees of complexity.

Encourage them to identify and use compound prepositions and prepositional phrases i
writing -
introduce them to use summary skills to write an objective summary of the given text
and poems.

--- PAGE 43 ---
et ee NS er me es oa .
- 4 ‘ “2 +k
a > “, ae

Ruhaiyat of Omar Khayam

Edward Fitzgerald (1809-1883)

After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
* use pre-reading and while-reading strategies to analyse and explore different layers of meaning
e listen to texts and carefully analyse the situations/events
* examine an author's point of view or purpose in a text

demonstrate attentive listening skills while working in a whole class setting and taking turns to
speak with standard pronunciation

demonstrate understanding of figurative language, word relationships, and nuances in word
meanings.

provide an objective summary of a range of texts.

demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written communication in
varying degrees of complexity.

comprehend and use contemporary Idioms and proverbs in the different texts and in their speech,
use paraphrasing skills to paraphrase a poem.

--- PAGE 44 ---
Pee ey ek et Ook et SS at OS ed ol OP / Land AB) ™
BOF ORS ON a ie Pa a) a al 5) A
~~ =. @) What doyou know about Omar Khayam? yews.
eA b) Does your previous knowledge of poetry help you in understanding about the | ~~ AS4
ms contents of this poem? : eee ee 2
OE INNS SPL EEIS DEN GA
) ‘ Awake for morning in the Bowl of Night = cy |
| AY Has flung the Stone that puts the Stars to Flight: Me
‘ae And Lo! the Hunter of the East has caught e

The Sultan's Turret in a Noose of Light.

ee

The Worldly Hope men set their Hearts upon we Le

Turns. - or it prospers ; and anon, Bl
Like sno ign the Desert's dusty Face sf
Lighting a little Hour or two - is gone. a
[P. uf

Vf While-reading tO Pas

G Z What happens to the worldly hopes ¢
“J of men? .
"La ir
There was a Door to which | found no Key; ;

There was Veil past which | could not see:
Some little Talk awhile of Me and Tog
There seem'd-----and then no more of Thee and Me.

The Moving finger writes; and having writ,
Move on: nor all thy Piety nor Wit

Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line, a
Nor all thy Tears wash out a Word of it.

While-reading
What does the Key mean here?

Yet Ah, that spring should vanish with the Rosel
That Youth's sweet - scented manuscript should close

The Nightingale that in the branches sang, ita ay
Ah whence, and whither flown again, who knows! Ae, —
io
ad VS Edward Fitzgerald , We
ray a. Do you think the message of the poet has been forcefully conveyed? Discuss. a i R

DP a es weer 2 EA et Be OE et I A SPST Ket i

ss if mat 2
! ‘ SPS Ot => = Ke a 7 7a

a) ‘e ‘ -
5 : t ~ 7 “ ~ -
“ivaie Nes gee yes ys
ee ==

we
oat
x2 em «

’
¥
” on
2 3
iat A eM
4

: ay a ;
NVA L

- Apt
= wig
.  &]

Ay NY Sema Tet 11, = | pd SAS é ea,

% ;

--- PAGE 45 ---
Notes and Comments

Edward Fitzgerald (1809-1883) was an English writer, best known for his Rubaiyat Of Omar
Khayam, which stands on its own as_ a Classic of English Literature. It is one of the most
frequently quoted of lyric poems.

Fitzgerald is best known for his translation of "The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam,” a collection of
Persian poems attributed to the 11th-century poet and mathematician Omar Khayyam.
Fitzgerald's translation, first published anonymously in 1859, became immensely popular and is
considered a classic of English literature.

Philosophical and lyrical qualities in the translation of Rubaiyat stand out abundantly. It added
a distinct Victorian flair in capturing the essence of Khayyam’'s original work. Fitzgerald's
version often focused on themes of mortality, the transience of life, and the pursuit of pleasure
in the face of uncertainty.

Fitzgerald's translation gained recognition and acclaim over time, eventually becoming one of
the most widely read and celebrated English translations of Persian poetry. It has been
appreciated for its beautiful language, evocative imagery, and thought-provoking themes.
Edward Fitzgerald's translation of the Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam remains influential and
continues to be studied and enjoyed by readers around the world.

Theme

The main theme revolves around the short-lived and fleeting nature of life, the inevitability of
death, and the pursuit of pleasure and knowledge. The message is to encourage readers to
embrace the present moment, find joy in life's pleasures, and consider the deeper mysteries of
existence. Religious belief about life is also there, presenting humans as helpless. Our deeply
held beliefs about God and heaven have also been focused. It contains pithy observations on
love, death, fate and the existence of God and the afterlife.

The poem remains a timeless work of literature that invites readers to ponder the mysteries of
life, love, and the transient nature of human existence. :

Wordss Meanings Synonyms

Peale | osuptomiey
ont ae vet
| flung ==—si|.threw, hurled |

eee

RRR eos | small tower connected with the building; tower

45

--- PAGE 46 ---
worldly hope hope for worldly gains _ eC PEP RT M
burns to the ground, of no use at all, futile MORES SS:

ani: a book, doSata eeEEES.
nightingale suggests the spirit of joy and youth fe

a

soon | presently |
ROBE E—- -~isereioenniall

woman's head-dress

| pastwhich | _beyondwhich |
| the Moving Sager |: tate destiny: Tis cesses ep
Pwrit | writen Od
[moveson | tefers tounending appearance offorms |
piety | aualty ofbeingpious |
ANN eo 8h wisdom, intelligence, understanding a> a ack cine te
Pure | entice, recat |
ee ee
[ tears____|_sefferings, pain, repentance Ear
OT Re A yaa a
Pah «dC enpression ofsorrow |
sweetscented | pleasant happy oT

| whence —_—_—si|..__ from where, from what place or source
to what place or point

a) Answer the following questions.
1 What is the overall theme or message of the poem “Rubaiyat of Omar Khayam”?
2 How does the poem explore the concept of mortality and the fleeting nature of life?
3 Highlight the attitude of the poem about fate and destiny.
4 Explain the way the idea of ‘Seize the moment is expressed in the poem.
5

Discuss the role of nature in Rubaiyat. How does Khayam use natural imagery to
convey his ideas?

How does the poem portray the relationship between the individual and the universe?
i

Nn oO

Name the only certain thing in life.
8 What is the narrative perspective used in the poem?

46

--- PAGE 47 ---
b) Figurative Language

“The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam" is filled with rich imagery, metaphors, and poetic devices. Here
are some of the prominent poetic devices used in "The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam”:

Metaphor: Metaphors are used to convey abstract ideas in vivid and imaginative ways. For
- example, "The moving finger writes, and having writ, Moves on" employs the metaphor of a
moving finger to represent the passage of time and the inevitability of fate.

Simile: Similes are comparisons that use “like” or “as” to create vivid imagery. An example from
the Rubaiyat is "Like Snow upon the Desert's dusty Face, / Lighting a little Hour or two— is gone.”
Here, the fleeting nature of life is compared to snow melting on the desert's surface.

Rhyme: Rhyme is the repetition of similar sounds at the end of lines. The Rubaiyat is known for its
quatrain structure/ The rhyme scheme adds a musical quality to the verses.

Hyperbole: Hyperbole is the use of exaggerated statements or claims for emphasis or dramatic
effect. The Rubaiyat employs hyperbole to emphasize the fleetingness of life and the inevitability
of death. For example, “The Worldly Hope men set their Hearts upon / Turns Ashes—or it prospers;
and anon, / Like Snow upon the Desert's dusty Face, / Lighting a little Hour or two—is gone.”

The poem is rich in its use of language and imagery, providing athought-provoking exploration of
themes such as life, love, mortality, and the pursuit of pleasure.

Paradox: A paradox is a statement that appears to be self-contradictory but may reveal a deeper
truth. In Rubaiyat paradoxical statements are used to explore complex philosophical themes. For
instance, "The Moving Finger writes; and, having writ, / Moves on: nor all thy Piety nor Wit / Shall
lure it back to cancel half a Line, / Nor all thy Tears wash out a Word of it.” This paradoxical
statement reflects on the inevitability of time and the inability tochangethepast. _

These various poetic devices and elements contribute to the beauty, depth, and contemplative
nature of “The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam.” The poem remains a timeless work of literature that
invites readers to ponder the mysteries of life, love, and the transient nature of human existence.

_ Attentive Listening Skill
1. Discuss the meanings of the following lines taken fr rom the poem.
‘Look to the Rose’. What is its significance?
‘Like snow upon the Desert's dusty face/Lighting a little Hour or two----is gone----’
2. What doesit refer to?
‘Ah, whence and whither flown again, who knows—discuss the mood of the line and
underlying questions’.
Inference e
1. Howwould you justify that man is the architect of his own fate?
2. Canlamenting over misfortune do any good to us for the years to come? Discuss.

a) Parts of Speech

Verb: A verb is a word that describes what the subject of a sentence is doing. Verbs can indicate
(physical or mental) actions, occurrences, and states of being.

47

--- PAGE 48 ---
Verbs Types Definition Example

Linking Verbs Connects the subject to a noun, pronoun, or adjective The flowers smell sweet. re
Auxiliary Verbs Helps the main verb express tense, mood, or voice She is going to the net

Action Verbs Expresses an action that the subject is doing. The dog chased the cat.

Helping Verbs Helps the main verb in a sentence. | should have studies for the test.
many Expresses necessity, possibility, ability. She can speak Spanish fluently.
Tra. Verbs — Takes an object in a sentence The student wrote an essay.
intra. Verbs Does not take an object in a sentence The bird sings in the morning.
Regular Verbs Forms past tense and past participle by adding “.ed" He walked to the store yesterday.

Irregular Verbs Forms past tense and past participle irregularly She ate breakfast this morning. (past tense of “eat”)

Activity : Use each type of verb to make acomplete sentence. —
Linking verb
Auxiliary verb.
Action verb

Helping verb
Transitive verb,

intransitive verb
Regular verb
Irregular verb

Note: Auxiliary verbs and Helping verbs or essentially the same. They are further divided into

Primary auxiliary verbs and Modal auxiliary verbs.

Primary Auxiliary verbs work together with main verb to create different verb forms “do”,

“have”, “be”.

Example: | do not understand his instructions.
They have already left for the function.

Modal auxiliary verbs are used with a main verb to express possibility, ability, permission,

necessity.

Example: She can complete all these tests alone.
The discovery ride may be dangerous.
You should help others.

It might rain today.

can
ignt [must

ought (to) | need (to)

b) Comprehend and use contemporary idioms and proverbs in the different texts and in their
speech

Proverbs are traditional sayings that are particular to a certain country. They are short, wise
sayings that usually offer some kind of advice, or capture an idea found in life.

Native English speakers frequently use proverbs in their conversations, and they often do this
without even realizing it. Proverbs sometimes reveal more about the culture of a country than

48

--- PAGE 49 ---
any textbook can: The values of the population are reflected in its proverbs.

Most popular proverbs in English

There are probably a thousand proverbs out there, so we curate this list of the most popular need-
to-know proverbs in English.

1. Many hands make light work

When many people work together to accomplish a difficult task, it doesn’ t seem so difficult. That
is the general meaning of this English proverb. In other words, if people work together, the work is
easier and is completed more quickly.

2. Strike while the iron is hot

This proverb means that you should take advantage of a favorable situation before it changes.

3. Honesty is the best policy

It is best to always be honest and tell the truth. By doing so, you will win the trust and respect of
others. a

4. The grass is always greener on the other side of the fence

Other people's lives always seem better, happier, and more successful than yours, even if your life is
going well.

5. Don't judge a book by its cover

Don't form an opinion or make a judgment about someone or something based on its outward
appearance.

6. An apple a day keeps the doctor away

Since apples are rich in vitamin C - which is vital to our health - this proverb means that proper
nutrition contributes to good health and fewer visits to the doctor. In this English proverb, apples
are a symbol of healthy foods and proper nutrition.

7. Better late than never

It is better to do something late than not do it.at all.

8. Don't bite the hand that feeds you

Don't treat badly the person or people on whom you depend on, or who take care of you in some way.
9. Rome wasn't built in a day

Time is needed to do great or important things.

10. Actions speak louder than words

A person's true character can be seen by what he does, not by what he says. A person can talk as
much as he wants, but he may not actually do anything to back up his words.

11. It's no use crying over spilled milk

This funny English proverb means you shouldn't waste time crying or complaining about something
bad that has happened that cannot be changed.

12. Still waters run deep

This is said about a person who tends to be quiet and does not say much. Such #erson often has a
“deep,” interesting personality.

13. Curiosity killed the cat

You could be tanined by being too exrtous about er too interested in something that doesn't concern you.
14. My hands are tied

This saying is not to be taken literally. It has a different meaning. It means that a person is unable to
change things or render help in a given situation.

15. Out of sight, out of mind

When you don't see or hear about something, you tend to forget about it.

Activity: Use the above given proverbs in your sentences.

ee
49

--- PAGE 50 ---
a) Objective Summary
How to Write an Objective Summary

(shows, describe, explains, discusses, lists, explores, illustrates, teaches, compares, states)

Choose 3-5 key details from the text that support the theme. Then, put it into
your own words. :

Write your objective summary. (free of personal thoughts) \
\ ‘
Activity: Provide an objective summary of a range of Rubaiyat Of Omar Khayam.

Paraphrasing Skills
To paraphrase a poem means to rewrite the poem using your own words. A paraphrased poem is
not a summary. Instead, you are going through the poem line by line and rewriting each line
completely in your own words. Be careful not to simply substitute synonyms. That is not true
paraphrasing.
Paraphrasing skills are all about expressing someone else’s ideas in your own words. It's a
superpower for writers because it lets you avoid plagiarism and showcase your understanding of a
topic. Here are some tips to sharpen your paraphrasing skills:
e Grasp the meaning first: Before you rewrite, make sure you understand the original
content thoroughly.
e Thesaurus time: Synonyms are your friends! Swap out words with similar meanings while
keeping the core idea intact.
e Sentence makeover: Play with sentence structure. Change active voice to passive or vice .
versa. Break up long sentences or combine short ones for a fresh look.
e Mix and match: Don't be afraid to combine techniques. Use synonyms, change sentence
structure, and maybe even reorder the information to create a truly unique paraphrase.
* Double check: After paraphrasing, compare it to the original to ensure you've captured
the essence without copying.

Activity: Paraphrase the “Rubaiyat Of Omar Khayam” stanza wise.

Teacher's Note
+ Ask students to examine an author's point of view or purpose in a text
Encourage them to demonstrate attentive listening skills while working in a whole class setting and taking turns to
speak with standard pronunciation
Help them to demonstrate understanding of figurative language, word relationships, and nuances in word meanings.

Motivate them to provide an objective summary of a range of texts.

Ask them to demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written communication in varying
degrees of complexity.

Let them comprehend and use contemporary Idioms and proverbs in the different texts and in their speech.
Encourage them to use paraphrasing skills to paraphrase a poem.

--- PAGE 51 ---
‘34

The Blanket. Short Story by Flo

p

yt

THE BLANKET

Floyd Dell (1887-1969)

After completing this lesson, you will be able to:

respofid to questions on a range of communicative purposes

analyze multiple interpretations of a story, drama, or poem (e.g., recorded or live production of a
play or recorded novel or poetry), evaluating how each version interprets the’source text

examine how an author develcps aid contrasts the points of view of different characters or
narrators in a text. Critique tiie plot development with respect to different aspects of the story

distinguish between the connotative and denotative meanings of words, both similar and dissimilar
denotations and their appropriate use in a variety of writing and texts

demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written communication in
varying degrees of complexity

comprehend and use contemporary Idioms and proverbs in the different texts and in their speech
apply editing and proofreading skills to a range of different texts and contexts

4 “a

yd Dell

--- PAGE 52 ---
© Pre-Reading -
a) Doyou think the elders leave a lesson for the youngers at every step they take? |
| b) What features do you think a good story should have?

Note: An excellent example of the moral “As you-sow, so shall you reap”.

It was a fine September night. A thin white moon rose over the valley. Peter, eleven years old, did
not see the moon. He did not feel the cool September breeze blow into the kitchen, for his
thoughts were fixed on a red and black blanket on the kitchen table.

The blanket was a gift from his dad to his Granddad... a going away gift. They said that Granddad
was going away... that’s why they called it “going away.”

Peter had not really believed that his dad would send Granddad While-reading
away. But now—there it was—the going-away gift. Dad had

brought it that very morning. And this was the last evening he | Why is the blanket called
and his Granddad would have with each other. the going away gift?

Together, the old man and the young boy washed the supper dishes. Dad had gone out... with that
woman he was to marry. He would not be back for some time. When the dishes were finished, the
old man and the boy went outside and sat under the moon.

“I'll get my harmonica and play for you,” the old man said. “I'll play some of the old tunes.”
- But instead of the harmonica, he brought out the blanket. It was a big, double blanket.

“Now, isn’t that a fine blanket?” said the old man, smoothing it over his knees. “And isn't your
father a kind man, to be giving the old man, a blanket like this, to go away with? It costs
something; it did—look at the wool in it! And warm it will be in these cold winter nights to come.
There will be no other blanket like it up there.”

It was like Granddad to be saying that, he was trying to make it easier. Ever since they talked
about “going away,” Granddad has said it was his idea. Imagine-leaving a warm house and friends
to go to that building... that government place, where he would be with so many other old fellows,
having the best of everything. But Peter had not really believed that dad would do it... until this
night when he brought home this blanket.

“Oh. Yes, it's a fine blanket,” Peter said and got up and went into the house. He wasn't the kind to
cry, and besides he was too old for that. He had just gone in to get Granddad's harmonica.

The blanket dropped to the floor as the old man took the
harmonica. It was the last night they would have supper | While-reading
together. Neither the old man, nor the young boy had to Why both the grand dad and the
say a word. Granddad played a few notes and then said,
“You'll remember this one.”

The thin moon was high overhead, and the gentle breeze

blew down the valley. The last time, Peter thought. He would never have Granddad play again. It
was well that dad was moving to a new house away from here. He did not want to sit here outside
on fine evenings, under a white moon, with Granddad gone. The music ended, and the two sat for
two minutes in silence. Then Granddad spoke, “Here is something happier.”

boy did not have a word to say?

52

--- PAGE 53 ---
Unit 5: The Blanket

Peter sat and looked out over the valley. Dad would marry that girl. Yes, that girl who had said she
would try to be a good mother to him, and all that.
The tune stopped suddenly, and Granddad said, “It's a poor tune, except to be dancing to.” And
then, “It's a fine girl your dad is going to marry. He will feel young again with a pretty wife like
that. And what would an old fellow like me do around the house... getting in the way... an old fool
with all the talk about backaches and pains!
“And then there will be babies coming, and | don’t want to be around listening to them cry all the
hours of the night. No, it's best that | leave. Well, one more tune or two, and then we will get to
bed, get some sleep. In the morning, I'll get my new blanket, and take my leave. Listen to this. It's
a bit of a sad tune but a nice one for a night like this.” They did not hear the two people coming
‘ down the road, Dad and the pretty girl with a hard bright doll like face. But they heard her laugh
and the tune stopped suddenly.
Dad did not say a word, but the girl walked up to Granddad and said prettily, “I'll not be seeing you
* in the morning, so | came over to say good-bye. “It's kind of you,” said Granddad, looking down at
the floor; and then seeing the blanket at his feet, he bent down to pick it up. “And will you look at
this,” he said, sounding himself like a little boy. “Isn't this a fine blanket my son has given me to go
away?”
“Yes,” she said, “it's a fine blanket.” She felt the wool again... and said, “A fine blanket indeed.”
She turned to Dad and said to himcoldly, “Must have cost a pretty penny.”
Dad cleared his throat... “I... | wanted him to have the best.”
The girl stood there, still looking at the blanket. “Mmmm... it's a double one, too.”
“Yes,” the old man said, “it's a double one... a fine blanket for an old fellow to be going away
with.”
: The boy suddenly walked in the house. He could hear the girl, still talking about the expensive
blanket. He heard his Dad get angry in his slow way. And
now, she was leaving. As Peter came out, the girl turned *
and called back, “No matter what you say, he doesn't winille-reading
Ez need a double blanket!”
E Dad looked at her with a funny look in his eye.
“She is right, Dad,” the boy said. “Granddad doesn't need a double blanket. Here, Dad,” and held
out a pair of scissors -“Cut it, Dad...cut the blanket in two.”
Both of them looked at the boy, surprised.
“Cut it in two, I tell you Dad. And keep the other half!”
“That's not a bad idea,” said Granddad gently. “I don't need such a big blanket.”

“Yes,” the boy said, “a single blanket is enough for an old man when he's sent away. We'll save the
other, Dad; it will come useful later.”

Why does Peter's dad get angry
with the girl he is going to marry?

“Now what do you mean by that?” asked Dad. While-reading
“I mean,” the boy said slowly, “that I'll give it to you, Dad Why does Peter ask his father to
when you're old and I'm sending you away.” cut the blanket in two?

--- PAGE 54 ---
There was a big silence, and then Dad went over to Granddad and stood before him,,not saying a
word,

But Granddad understood, for he put out his hand and laid it on Dad’s shoulder. Peter was
watching them. And he heard Granddad whisper softly “It's alright son. | knew you didn’t mean
it....” And then Peter cried. But it didn’t matter because all three were crying together.

© Post-reading
Why do all three Peter, dad and grand-dad cry at the end of the story?

\
————— —_

Notes and comments

Floyd Dell was an American poet, novelist, playwright, literary editor and the author of several
books. He began his literary career as a newspaper man. He first served as a reporter for the
Davenport Daily Times, and then as editor of various papers. Through 1920's, he continued
writing novels and poetry, anda number of books and articles based on various themes.

He retired in 1947, but continued writing during the remaining years of his life till 1969.

Theme : | SY, He eB S11 GA,
Taking great care of our values is the railed: The Blanket is a sad and heart rending story.
The story manifests greed, hypocrisy, the day callous attitude towards the elderly, and
how at times our mean instincts can overtake duties. ) :
The masterly craftsmanship of Floyd Dell is ev fine structure of this tale. He makes
an effective use of dialogue and has a superb prose ‘yeep fs

Words Meanings Synonyms

coldly | ina way that is not friendly or enthusiastic Sa
a musical instrument

a note is a single sound of a certain pitch and length
made by the voice, or a musical instrument

to speak in soft sound, undertone

--- PAGE 55 ---
a) Answer the following questions

1.

CP OPNAMaAWN

Describe the conversation between Peter and Granddad at the beginning of the story.
Why was Peter's Dad sending Granddad away and where to?

Give the reason of the girl’s mind change, who was marrying Peter's dad.

Was it a surprise when Peter asked his father to cut the blanket in two?

Peter's attitude towards his father and Granddad was unusual. Elaborate.

What moral lesson about human relationship do you learn from this story?

How would you describe the problems of the characters of the —

What sort of person is Peter's father?

Examine how the author has developed and contrasted the points of view of different
characters in the story. Critique the plot development with respect to different aspects of
the story.

b) Tick (/) the right statement and (X) the false one.

VP YP =

A thin gray moon rose over the valley.

The blanket was a gift from his dad to his Grandmother.

The young man and the little boy washed the supper dishes.

He wasn't the kind to cry, and besides he was too old for that.

The thin moon was high overhead, and the gentle breeze blew down the valley.

There was a low silence, and then Dad went over to Granddad and stood before him,
not saying a word.

Respond to questions on a range of communicative purposes,

4)

@

Discuss in class the advantages and disadvantages of joint family system.

Survey the class to know how many students are living in nucleus family and how many in .

joint family.

Discuss what your reply would be to the fact ‘why young people today do just what they
like’? (refer to the text)

Inference

1.
2.

Do you think peaceful living depends in caring for the values?
“As you sow, so shall you reap”. Do you agree?

55

--- PAGE 56 ---
Vocabulary and Grammar
a) Parts of Speech

Adjective: Adjectives are the words that modify or describe nouns and pronouns, providing
more information about their qualities, states of being, or quantities.

Descriptive Describes a noun’s quality or Characteristic] Red car, happy child

Points out a specific noun } This book, that house
Possessive Shows ownership or possession My phone, their car

5

indefinite [Refers to an unspecified noun | Any person, several options

Superlative Biggest house, most expensive car
Proper Derived from a proper noun and used to describe it | Chinese cuisine, Shakespearean play

Activity: Go through the following sentences and identify the type of adjective
used in them.

Sara will clean her messy room today.

My sister brought some French pastries.

The miser lost all his money. ‘

There haven't been sufficient crops to sell this year.

Collecting coins is an interesting hobby.

The boy did not have any soup.

There's no milk left in the bowl.

Either boy was present there.

This bag is heavier than the suitcase.

10. The food was delicious.

11. Whose pencil box is this?

12. These apples are pretty sweet.

13. Ali came second in the marathon.

14. | saw it with my own eyes.

15. What a splendid piece of art!

16. Emily Bronte was a Victorian novelist.

17. The Atlantic Ocean is the largest ocean in the world.

18. | did not find those books.

‘

i

—
.

POEnayawn

56

--- PAGE 57 ---
b) Connotation and denotation

CONNOTATION versus DENOTATION

Denotation refers to
the primary, literal

Connotation reter
the personal and cultura
meanings in addition to meaning or the

heir primary, iterat dictionary meaning of

meaning of a word a word.

C onnotation can be .
Denotation is not

classified as positive .
thus classified.

connotation and
negative connotation

tn ; Denotation remains the
ONNOLALION ean Chanee
: same regardless of
According toe culture : .
4 culture and personal
and personal experiences
experience.

Word: Cheap
¢ Denotation: Low in price. (literal meaning)
« Connotation: Negative - poor quality, stingy.
Word: Smart
¢ Denotation: Having or showing a high degree of intelligence. (literal meaning)
¢ Connotation: Can also mean stylish or fashionable depending on context.

Activity : For each sentence, choose the word in parentheses that best fits the
context, considering both denotation and connotation.

1. The children were feeling very (excited/agitated) during the wait for Sana.
. The old house had a very (aged/decrepit) appearance.
. The aroma of freshly baked bread filled the air with a (pleasant/pungent) smell.

. The detective gave the suspect a (stern/severe) look.
. The athlete showed great (perseverance/stubbornness) in completing the race.

--- PAGE 58 ---
c) Proverbs
1. Easy come, easy go

This English proverb means that money is easily earned and just as easily spent or lost (on
gambling, for example).

2. You can't make an omelette without breaking a few eggs

It is impossible to do something good or accomplish an important task without encountering
some problems or making some sacrifices.

3. The forbidden fruit is always the sweetest

Things that are prohibited seem very attractive or desirable.

4. If you scratch my back, I'll scratch yours

If you do something to help me, | will do something to help you.
5. It's the tip of the iceberg

As everyone knows, only a small part of an iceberg is visible above the water. The rest is
underwater.

6. Learn to walk before you run

Learn basic skills before you attempt to do something more difficult. For example, don't start
to learn English with difficult subjects such as articles or gerunds. Start with easier material,
slowly increase your knowledge, and gradually work toward studying more difficult topics.

7. First things first

The most important things should be done before everything else.

8. Don't bite off more than you can chew

Don't take on more work or responsibility than you can handle at one time.
9. It’s better to be safe than sorry

Be careful and exercise caution - even if it seems unnecessary and it takes longer to complete
something - and you will avoid potential problems that could arise later.

10. The early bird catches the worm

If you arrive early or do something before other people do it, you have a greater chance of
succeeding.
11. Don't make a mountain out of an anthill (or molehill)

Don’t make a minor problem or difficulty into a major one; don't exaggerate the significance
of a small problem.

12. Where there's a will, there's a way
If your desire to accomplish something is strong enough, you will find a way to do it.
13. Always put your best foot forward

The meaning of this English proverb is that you should always try your best to make a good
impression on others; show your best traits and qualities.

14, The squeaky wheel gets the grease

The person who complains the most or is most vocal about something that he needs is usually
the one who receives help or attention

38

--- PAGE 59 ---
15.Arolling stone gathers no moss

The last proverb on our list has two meanings: 1) a person who is always moving - never living in
one place very long - cannot be successful or make a lot of money, and 2) a busy person will not
become stagnant but will remain creative and productive.

16.When in Rome, do as the Romans do

This proverb means that you should follow the local customs of whichever place you happen to be
(even if it seems odd or unsavory).

17. Birds of a feather flock together

This proverb refers to people who have similar, overlapping interests, and how they often tend to
be friendly or may be found together.

18. Astitch in time saves nine

This proverb refers to procrastination: it means that getting your work done ahead of time or
completing some simple task earlier rather than later, will save you effort down the road.

19, Beauty is in the eye of the beholder

This English proverb refers to the fact that everyone sees beauty differently, and what is ugly to
one person may be beautiful to another.

20. Those in glass houses shouldn't throw stones

This proverb refers to hypocrisy: it means that you should not accuse someone of a charge that
you yourself are guilty of.

21. Absence makes the heart grow fonder

This proverb means that you tend to have a fonder memory and feeling about someone or
something after tt 2y have been gone for a period.

Act vity : Use the above used proverbs in meaningful sentences.

Writing

Editing and proofreading
skills to a range of different
texts and contexts

the popularity of the club has
‘term and is expected to continue

Source: Prim-Ed Proofreading and Editing Skills

59

--- PAGE 60 ---
Editing:

e Focuses on the big picture: Editing involves a broader look at the structure, clarity, and
content of a text.

® Improves overall quality: Editors ensure the writing achieves its purpose effectively. They
might:

¢ Refine the structure: This could involve rearranging paragraphs, adding transitions, or
improving the flow of information.

e Strengthen the argument: In persuasive or informative writing, editors might check
for logical flow of ideas, evidence, and clarity of the main point.

« Enhance language and style: Editors might suggest improvements to sentence
structure, word choice, and overall tone to make the writing more engaging or
impactful.

* Fact-check and ensure accuracy: This is especially important for academic or
technical writing.

General Editing and Proofreading Tips:

e Accuracy: Check for typos, grammatical errors (subject-verb agreement, punctuation
mistakes), and spelling inconsistencies.

e Clarity: Ensure the writing is clear, concise, and easy to understand. Eliminate wordiness
and confusing sentence structure.

* Consistency: Maintain consistent style throughout the text, following guidelines like
preferred punctuation (APA, MLA, Chicago) or voice (formal, informal).

« Flow: Read the text aloud to check for awkward phrasing or choppy sentences. Ensure a
smooth and logical flow of ideas.

Editing for Different Text Types:

* Formal Writing (Academic papers, Business reports): Focus on proper grammar, formal
vocabulary, and adherence to style guides. Check for logical arguments, referencing, and
proper formatting.

¢ Informal Writing (emails, blog posts, social media): Maintain a conversational tone while
ensuring clarity and avoiding slang or overly informal language. Check for appropriate
emojis or hashtags depending on the platform.

* Creative Writing (fiction, poetry): Here, style takes center stage. Look for consistency in
tone, voice, and point of view. Check for effective use of figurative language and
adherence to specific literary elements.

Activity: (i) Read the paragraph below and identify the issues that would be addressed
during the editing stage.

--- PAGE 61 ---
The weather was terrible yesterday. Rain poured down all day, making it impossible to go
outside. It was so boring because | couldn't play with my friends. | ended up watching TV most
of the day, which wasn't very exciting.

1. What issue might an editor address regarding the overall structure of the paragraph?
2. How could an editor improve the clarity of the writer's feelings?
3. Suggest an edit to make the language more engaging.

(ii) The following paragraph contains grammatical errors, typos, and formatting
inconsistencies, Find and correct the mistakes as you would during the proofreading stage.

We went to the beach last weekend, it was a beautiful day. The sand was warm between our
‘ toes, and the waves crashed loudly against the shore. We built a sand castle and then went for
a swim in the refreshing ocean water. Overall, it was a perfect experience!

Teacher's Note
+ Encourage students to examine how an author develops and contrasts the points of view of

different characters or narrators in a text and to critique the plot development with respect to
different aspects of the story.
Ask them to distinguish between the connotative and denotative meanings of words, both
similar and dissimilar denotations and their appropriate use in a variety of writing and texts.
Encourage them to demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and
written communication in varying degrees of complexity.

Ask them to comprehend and use contemporary Idioms and proverbs in the different texts and
in their speech.

Motivate them to apply editing and proofreading skills to a range of different texts and
contexts.

--- PAGE 62 ---
STAY HUNGRY - STAY FOOLISH

(Excerpts from Steve Jobs address at Stanford University on June 12, 2005)
(1955-20171)

After completing this lesson, you willbea. —.o:

e engage effectively in a range of collaborative discussions(one-on-one, in groups, and teacher-led)
with diverse partners on grade-level topics, texts, and issues
* critique reading interpretations, taking account of others’ views on reading

* use pre-reading and while-reading strategies to analyse and explore different layers of meaning
within texts including biases and opinions ;

* explain whether predictions about the content of a text are acceptable or should be modified and

why
*® demonstrate wledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written communication in

varying degrees of Complexity | .
e use all types of tenses correctly in speech and writing
e apply the techniques of writing the first draft with sufficie’ ’ s; proofreading and editing

details to suit the purpose and audience

--- PAGE 63 ---
© Pre-Reading }
a) Whatcomes to your mind after reading the heading of the lesson? |
| b) How does reading about the life experiences of Steve Jobs inspire?

“Thank you. | am honoured to be with you today at your commencement from one of the finest
universities of the world. Truth be told | never graduated from college.”

| was an adopted child of parents who had not graduated from college. However, they decided to
send me to college. | was naive to choose a college as expensive as Stanford and all my working
parents savings were spent on college tuition. After six months, | could not see the value in it. |
had no idea of what | wanted to do with my life and how college is going to help me figure it out. So
| dropped out and thought it will work out. It was pretty scary at that time, but looking back it was
the best decision, I've made. The minute | dropped out | could stop taking the required classes
that didn't interest me and begin dropping at taking the one’s that looked interesting.

I didn't have a dorm room, so | slept on the floor in a friend's room. | returned coke bottles for 5
cents deposits to buy food with.

| decided to take a calligraphy class, where | learnt about serif and san serif type faces about
varying the type of space between different letter combinations
about what makes topography great. It was beautiful,
historical, and beautifully subtle, in a way that science couldn't | What did Steve Jobs learn
capture and i found this fascinating. in calligraphy class?

None of this had any hope of practical application in my life, but ten years later, when we were
designing the first Macintosh Computer, it all came back to me. And we designed it all. It was the
first computer with beautiful topography. If | had not dropped out from college, Mac would not
have had multiple type spaces or proportionally spaced fonts. Of course it was impossible to
connect the dots looking forward then, but it was very clear
looking backwards ten years later.Again you can't connect the | While-reading

dots looking forward, but you can connect them looking | Steve Jobs thought that _
backwards. You have to trust in something, your gut, your | being fired from Apple was
destiny, life and opportunities. This approach has never let me | the best thing that

down and it has made all the difference in my life. happened to him. Why?

While-reading

| was lucky - | found what | loved to do early in life. Woz and | started Apple in my parent's garage,
when | was twenty. We worked hard and in ten years Apple grew up into 2 billion $ company with
4000 employees. We had just released our finest creation Macintosh a year earlier and | had just
turned thirty. And then | got fired, how you can get fired from the company you started. Well as
Apple grew | hired someone, who | thought was talented enough to run the company with me and _
for the first one year the things went well. But then our visions for the future diverged and we had
a falling out. Our Board of directors sided with him and | was out at 30. What had been the focus of
my entire life was gone and it was very devastating.

| didn't know what to do for few months. | had felt that | had led the previous generation of
entrepreneur's down, that | had dropped the baton as it was being passed to me. | met with David
Packard and Bob Noyce and apologized for screwing up the things so badly. | was a very public

i UU EE
63

--- PAGE 64 ---
figure and | even thought of running away from the valley. But something slowly dawned upon me,
| still loved what | did. The turn of events at Apple had not changed one bit. | had been rejected,
but was still in love and so | decided to start over.

| couldn't see it then, but getting fired from Apple was the best thing that ever happened to me.
The heaviness of being successful was replaced by the lightness of being beginners again, less sure
about everything. It freed me to enter one of the most productive periods of my life.

During the next five years, | started a company named Text, and another company Pixar. Pixar
went on to create the first computer animated film, Toy Story and is now the most successful
video in the world. In the remarkable turn of events Apple bought Next. | returned to Apple and
the technology we developed at Next is the heart of current Apple renaissance.

| am pretty sure none of this would have happened, if | had not been fired from Apple. It was an
awful tasted medicine, but | think the patient needed it. Sometimes life hits you on the head with
a brick. Do not lose faith. | am convinced that only thing that kept me going was that | loved what |
did. Your work is going to fill a large part of your life and the only way to be truly satisfied is to do
what you believe is great work. If you haven't found it yet, keep looking. Don't settle. As with all
matters of the heart, you will know when you find it. While-readin

And like any other great relationships, it keeps getting 8
better and better as the years roll on. So keep looking | According to Steve Jobs what is going
until you find it. Don't settle. to fill a large part of one's life.

Your time is limited, so don't waste it living someone else's life, don't be trapped with dogma,
which is living with someone else's thinking. Don't let the noise of other's thinking drown out your
inner voice. And most importantly, have the courage to follow your own heart and intuition; they
somehow already know what you want to become. Everything else is secondary.

When | was young there was an amazing whole earth catalogue, which was one of the religious
books of my age, written by Stephen Band with his poetic touch. That was late 60's, before
personal computers and desk top publishing, so it was all made with type writers, scissors and
Polaroid camera. It was sort of like Google and great notions, in paperback form, 35 years before
Google came along. It was idealistic and overflowing with neat tools.

Stewart and his team put out several issues of the Whole Earth Catalogue, and when it had run its
course they put out a final issue, it was mid 90's and | was your age. On the back cover of their final
issue was a photograph of an early morning country road, the kind you would find, if you were
hitch hiking. Beneath it were the words, “Stay Hungry, Stay Foolish.” And | have always wished
that for myself, | wish that for you.

Stay Hungry, Stay Foolish,
“Thank you all very much”.

© Post-reading
What did Steve Jobs wish for himself and for others?

--- PAGE 65 ---
Notes and Comments

Steve Jobs (1955-2011) was an American entrepreneur, inventor, and business magnate. He
co-founded Apple Inc. with Steve Wozniak in 1976, and his vision and leadership played a
pivotal role in transforming Apple into one of the most influential technology companies in the
world. Jobs, along with Wozniak, is credited with popularizing the personal computer with the
Apple Il in the late 1970s. He then revolutionized the industry again with the Macintosh in the
1980s, introducing a user-friendly graphical interface that made computers more accessible to
everyday users. He was instrumental in the development of the iPod, iPhone, and iPad, all of
which redefined their respective categories and had a lasting impact on how we consume
music, communicate, and interact with technology. Steve Jobs was known for his relentless
pursuit of innovation, his focus on design and user experience, and his strong marketing skills.
He is remembered as a visionary leader who forever changed the landscape of technology and
continues to inspire entrepreneurs and technologists today. This is a part of Steve Job's speec
at Stanford University in 2005.

Theme

Main theme is to guide youth to be successful in life by utilizing their time, rather than wasting
it. The speech has all the necessary ingredients, useful for youth. It will enable youth to learn
life skills to achieve their goals.

Glossary

Words Meanings synonyms

calligraphy handwriting, penmanship longhand script |

diverged to move or extend in different directions from a
common point

specific principles or doctrine authoritatively laid

down

entrepreneur | person who organises and manages a business

a receptacle or holy water. The reservoir for oil in a
lamp

courage and fortitude, nerve, determination, stamina
soliciting rides from passing vehicles

having or showing lack of experience, judgment or
information

renaissance activity, spirit or time of the great revival of art,
literature and learning

|subtle —_—‘| delicate, faint and mysterious

topography _| detailed mapping or charting of the features of a small
area ‘i

65

--- PAGE 66 ---
Comprehension

a) Answer the following questions.
1. Describe the impression of the speaker you get after reading the first two paragraphs.
Identify the reason Steve Jobs used to sleep ina friend's room.
Identify the wisdom in joining calligraphy classes.
Explain the significance of Macintosh Computer.
Getting fired from Apple turned out to be the best for Steve Jobs. Discuss.
Describe the meaning of “sometimes life hits you hard on the head with a brick”.
Identify the paragraph containing Steve Jobs’ message.
Explain the importance of the Whole Earth Dialogue.

ep ONAWRYWND

Write the main point of the speech.

. Describe whether or not it is appropriate to make predictions about the idea to be
successful in life by utilizing one’s time rather than wasting it. If you agree then why?

. What do you understand by these statements of the speaker?
a) “The heaviness of being successful was replaced by the lightness of being beginners
again”.
b) “Your work is going to fill a large part of your life”.
12. Write down the names of other renowned universities like Stanford.
13. With the help of internet write a detailed note of Stanford University.
b) Critique reading interpretations, taking account of others’ views on reading.

Critiquing reading interpretations requires actively considering others’ viewpoints. Listen
attentively and acknowledge their ideas. When presenting your critique, focus on the text itself
and use evidence to support your reasoning. Frame the discussion respectfully, seeking
understanding rather than simply pointing out flaws. Look for common ground and use the
exchange to explore the text's complexity. By valuing diverse interpretations and engaging in
open dialogue, you can create a richer understanding of the literature you're analyzing.

_
So

a
+.

Activity: Briefly summarize the text of this unit as a resource for this activity. What is your

initial interpretation of the text's meaning? Why do you think this?

Engage effectively in a range of collaborative discussions (one-on-one, in groups, and
teacher-led) with diverse partners on grade-level topics, texts, and issues.

* Form different groups in the class and discuss who is Steve Jobs and where is Stanford,
¢ Give your views about the failures Steve Jobs had to face in life.
e Hope’ and ‘despair’ are part of life. How would you relate this with Steve Job's life?

66

--- PAGE 67 ---
e Apple’ computers are the result of aman's determination. Discuss.

¢ In groups of three or four, choose one statement and prepare a short conversation based on
it. Memorise your dialogues and practise saying them with the appropriate tone, according
to the emotion being conveyed. Present the conversation in the class.

inference
1. Isit possible to achieve one's goal without hard work?
2. Istoday’s highly competitive world a big challenge for youth?

Pronoun

A pronoun is a word that takes the place of a noun. They are used to avoid repetition and make
sentences flow more smoothly. Pronouns stand in for nouns or noun phrases.They prevent
repetitive use of the same noun and make sentences more concise.

Examples: "I went to the store. | bought milk there.” In the second sentence,
store” to avoid saying it twice.

replaces "the

Pronouns Types Use Exam ite

Ss Co
=<
Ce ee

Activity: Choose the correct pronoun and use it in the sentence.
1. (Me/\) feel like taking a short trip to the Maldives
2. (I/me) think you should participate in the debate.
3. Wuthering Heights is (her/hers) favourite book.

4. Those papers are (mine/my).
5. The box was lying around. Is (it/its) yours?

--- PAGE 68 ---
6. The dog almost choked (himself/itself).
7. Natasha was all by (yourselves/herself)
8. | got (me/myself) all wet.

9. (That/this) book lying here is mine.

10. (Each/neither) of us were given a gift hamper.
11. Do you want (that/it) pen?

12. | lost the toy you gave (me/myself)

13. This house is (ours/our).

14. It was (their/theirs) car.

15. Do you know (his/him)?

SS Se

b) Tenses
Present Tense and its kinds

Sub + Sub + has/have +
has/have + been + V1 + ing +
V3 + obj. obj + since/for.

She is drives a car. | She is driving a car. | She has driven a car. wwe tes been driving

She goes to school. | She going to school.| She has gone to school. a been going to

Sub + is/am/are +
V1 + ing + obj.

Activity: Make two sentences with each type of present tense.
Simple Present Tense

/

Present Continuous Tense

ee ——————— ————
_S——_— —__—_ rrr rcv
Present Perfect Tense

ee  —LX_VKXLR@
ee ee a ee ee ee re Ne

Present Perfect Continuous Tense

68

--- PAGE 69 ---
Correction of Errors in English Writing
Correction of errors is the process of identifying and rectifying mistakes or inaccuracies in
any given context. It involves:

1.
2.

Detection: Recognizing the presence of an error.
Identification: Pinpointing the specific nature of the error.

3. Correction: Implementing the necessary changes to rectify the mistake.
Common contexts where error correction is applied

Language learning: Identifying and correcting grammatical, spelling, and vocabulary
errors in written or spoken language.

Data entry: Ensuring accuracy in data input by identifying and correcting
inconsistencies or typos.

Proofreading: Reviewing written material to identify and correct errors in grammar,
spelling, punctuation, and style.

Scientific research: Identifying and correcting errors in data collection, analysis, and
reporting.

Software development: Identifying and correcting bugs or glitches in software
programs. ,

Benefits of effective error correction

Improved accuracy: Minimizes the occurrence of mistakes.
Enhanced quality: Ensures that the final product or output is free from errors.
Increased efficiency: Reduces the time and resources required to fix errors later on.

Enhanced credibility: Builds trust and confidence in the accuracy and reliability of the
work,

Examples
1. Grammatical Errors:

Incorrect: He go to school everyday.

Correct: He goes to school everyday. ;

o Explanation: The subject “He” is singular, so the verb should be "goes" (singular
third person present tense).

Incorrect: The books is on the table.

Correct: The books are on the table.

o Explanation: "Books" is plural, so the verb should be “are.” .

Incorrect: Me and my friend went to the park.

Correct: My friend and | went to the park.

o Explanation: In a subject-verb construction, the pronoun “I” should be used after
the other person.

2. Syntactical Errors:

Incorrect: Running in the park, the dog chased its tail.

Correct: While running in the park, the dog chased its tail.

o Explanation: The phrase “Running in the park” needs to be modified to a
subordinate clause using a subordinating conjunction like “While.”

69

--- PAGE 70 ---
Incorrect: He likes to read, to write, and to play sports.

Correct: He likes to read, to write, and to play sports.

© Explanation: The sentence is already paratial. All three verbs are in the infinitive
form.

3. Lexical Errors:

Incorrect: Their going to the store.

Correct: They're going to the store.

o Explanation: “They're” is a contraction of “they are.”

Incorrect: Its raining outside.

Correct: It's raining outside.

o Explanation: "It's" is a contraction of "it is.”

Incorrect: | feel bad for him.

Correct: | feel sorry for him.

o Explanation: "Bad" and “sorry” have slightly different meanings in this context.
“Bad” implies that something is wrong with him, while “sorry” expresses sympathy.

4. Punctuation Errors:

Activity : Each sentence contains one or more errors in grammar, punctuation,
or usage. Identify and correct the errors by rewriting the sentences properly.

.. The car, along with the bicycles, are in the garage.

10. Neither Ali nor his friends likes playing video games.
~ 11. If | was you, | would never let that happen.
12. The student didn't knew the answer to the question.
13. She have lived in this city for five years.
14. A number of students was absent from the class today.

15. The news about the pandemic were very disturbing.

Incorrect: The boy said "| want to go home.”

Correct: The boy said, "] want to go home.”

o Explanation: A comma is needed to separate the introductory phrase “The boy said”
from the direct quote.

Incorrect: He is a kind and generous person.

Correct: He is a kind and generous person.

o Explanation: No punctuation is needed between adjectives when they are
coordinate (i.e., they could be joined by “and”).

She don't know where is her book.

The dog chased it's tail around the yard.

Me and my friend is going to the park later.

Each of the children were given their own pencil.
He has gave the book to his teacher yesterday.

| saw a flock of birds flying over the field, it were beautiful.
My mother made me to clean my room before | went outside.
. The teacher told to us that the exam was postponed.

70

--- PAGE 71 ---
el

Apply the techniques of writing the first draft with sufficient details; proofreading and editing
details to suit the purpose and audience

THE WRITING PROCESS

t=

PUBLISHING |

EDITING/
PROOFREADING

Please note that the writing process is not linear. Steps may be repeated, just
like the arrows in the diagram above circle back through earlier steps.

Activity: Follow the above mentioned writing technique and write an essay to
guide youth to be successful in life by utilizing their time, rather than wasting it.

Teacher's Note

Ask students to demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written
communication in varying degrees of complexity.

Let them use all types of tenses correctly in speech and writing.

Ask them to apply the techniques of writing the first draft with sufficient details; proofreading
and editing details to suit the purpose and audience.

-

71

--- PAGE 72 ---
After conipleting this lesson, you will be able to:

* speak confidently and fluently in a wide range of contexts, For example, (conflict resolution, panel
discussion, role-play, dialogue, etc.) to fulfil different purposes (exposition, argumentation etc. ).

¢ analyse organisational patterns in a text:
a, list/ sequence of ideas/ events comparison-contrast

b. cause-effect
c. problem-solution
d, reasons/ assumptions-conclusion
* give an informed personal and analytical response to a variety of texts and provide a textual
reference in support.

e demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written communication in
varying degrees of complexity.

e use all types of tenses correctly in speech and writing.

* gather relevant information from multiple authentic available resources following research
ethics to write and present their assignment

--- PAGE 73 ---
eee _

© Pre-Reading
a) Doyou know the importance of health?
b) How does one feel on getting sick?
c) Have you ever been hospitalised?
d) Have you ever heard “health is wealth”?

The next time you see a packet of cigarettes, notice what is Risks from Smoking
written on the label. It is a warning about the dangers of ur aetna
cigarette smoking to your health. Most governments require = *"""=- se ol
cigarette makers to warn people about the risks of smoking.

© ean roe e

uege

In the past people did not know about the dangers of cigarette Libera © rome
smoking. But medical experts have learned that the smoke mart 6 Ysa
from tobacco contains poisonous substances which can rome’ * Corns we one
damage your body. Smoking tobacco in pipes or cigars is just jase. a

as harmful as smoking cigarettes. Smoking tobacco is also 4 —_——
harmful. Tobacco in any form damages your health. From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Three seconds after a person starts smoking a cigarette, his | While-reading

heart beats faster, his blood pressure rises, and a portion of How can people be warned
the oxygen in his blood is replaced by a harmful gas. Cancer about the risks of smoking?
causing chemicals also fill his lungs every time he inhales the
smoke. Nicotine, carbon monoxide and tar are the most :
dangerous substances in cigarette smoke. While-reading

How do the cancer cells

Nicotine makes the blood vessels narrower so that the heart destroy the healthy cells?

must work harder to pump blood through the body. The flow of
blood in a smoker's body is reduced because of nicotine.

Carbon monoxide is the harmful gas that replaces part of the oxygen in blood. The oxygen level n
a smoker's blood is lowered by this poisonous gas. Tar damages lung tissues. It affects the hair like
parts of cells, called cilia that line the breathing tubes. By moving back and forth, the cilia sweep
dust and particles out of the lungs to the throat and mouth so they can be breathed or coughed
out. When tar from cigarette smoke builds up in the lungs, it forms a sticky brown mass which
slows down the action of the cilia. Smoking one pack of cigarettes every day puts a cup of tar into
the lungs each year. Cigarette smoke also causes a lung disease known as chronic bronchitis. It
occurs when smoke irritates the lining of the bronchial tubes, making them produce too much
mucus. The mucus blocks the air tubes, and a person with bronchitis coughs a lot to get rid of it. As
tar builds up on the walls of the air tubes and lungs over the years, it can cause cancer cells to
grow. Cancer cells multiply and destroy the healthy cells, and after sometime the lungs will not
function correctly.

The only way to treat lung cancer is to remove all or part of the diseased lung. This type of cancer
is the second highest cause of death among people who smoke. Non-smokers rarely get cancer.

Even though smoking is dangerous to health, smokers often find it very difficult to quit the habit.
Smokers’ bodies become so used to nicotine that they have a nervous reaction when they don't get

it.

73

--- PAGE 74 ---
Quitting smoking is the hardest during the first
few days. The body tells the brain that it wants
nicotine. It takes a lot f will power forapersonto | /
resist smoking at that point. Eventually,
however, the body will learn how to get along |
without nicotine. '

Some people think that chewing tobacco (i.e. ; ‘
paan and naswar) won't harm their health, but ©
they are wrong.

Nicotine can enter the body through blood
vessels in the mouth. It then makes the heart —
speed up and chewing tobacco also leads to —
other health problems. It can cause mouth —___ =>
cancer or damage the gums so that the teeth |B iiiis
become loose and fall out. | tens eset

In many countries it is against the law to cell |
tobacco to young people. Evenif a person doesn't

== GET ON THE PATH TO A HEALTHIER YOU!
IF YOU QUIT SMOKING RIGHT NOW:

i

ya ‘2 a
‘ieee! a <] "

eeVeUN 2 Mow.) :
www.BeTobaccofree.gov >

use tobacco, he or she still can be harmed by it. ES
Every time you breathe/inhale near people who »cerbon sponse iow

are smoking, you breathe in poison: —)"
substance. Nearly two-third of the smoke froma | |7 :

cigarette goes into the air around the smoker. =
When you breathe it in, the smoke candamage | (¢'
your body in the same way that it harms the | slated
smoker's body. Medical experts have learned that

people who live with smokers have a greater risk of getting lung
cancer than people who live with non-smokers.

Because of the danger to non-smokers, many countries have laws
prohibiting smoking in public places. The picture of a burning
cigarette with a single or double line drawn across it is the
international No Smoking symbol.

© Post-reading
Why is smoking prohibited in public places?

Notes and Comments

This report has been taken from a journal published in Turkiye. The Istanbul based journal
didn't have the name of the author. However, the extract is a part of the lengthy report.

Theme
Awareness and recognition of smoking related problems is the theme. Health care is of prime
importance. It is highlighted that prevention is better than cure.

--- PAGE 75 ---
Glossary

Words Meanings Synonyms

bronchitis illness that affects the bronchial tubes leading to | bronchial infection
lungs

a poisonous gas formed when carbon partly burns ea Eas
lasting for a long time
to take smoke, gas into your body as you breathe

large amount of a substance without a definite shape
or form
}mucus thick liquid produced in parts of the human body

nicotine a poisonous substance in tobacco that people become
addicted

substance used to paste or stick things when touched

solid, liquid or gas having particular qualities
(chemical)
ee SS a substance formed by burning tobacco

a) Answer the following questions.
1. Describe the warning written on the packet of cigarettes.
2. Identify the dangers of cigarette smoking.
3. Explain the ways tobacco damages health.
4. Illustrate the three most dangerous substances in cigarettes.
5. Explain the reason of blood vessels becoming narrower.
6. Write down the reason of oxygen level lowering in a smoker's body.
7.Mention the way a smoker suffers from chronic Bronchitis.
8. It’s difficult to quit smoking. Discuss.
9. In which way a non-smoker gets affected by smoking?
10. Restate the International Smoking Symbol.
b) Find the definition of each word as used in the text:
1 require (line-3)
a) make somebody do something b) want strongly
Cc) give advice on a subject d) let something to be done

2 vessel ( line ---16 )
a) something in which liquid is kept b) body cells that contain proteins

75

--- PAGE 76 ---
c) narrow tubes in the body d) container of something
3 quit ( line---34 )

a) seem b) stop c) quarrel d) link
4 fallout (line---55 )
a) drop b) pack c) break up d) come down
5 prohibit (line---68 )
a) refuse b) forbid c) protect . d) hide
c) Mark the statement as true or false:
i) In the past people knew a lot about the dangers of cigarette smoking. Beg
ii) Smoking tobacco in pipes and cigars is not at all harmful like smoking cigarettes. T/ F
iii) Nicotine makes the blood vessels narrower. T/F
iv) The flow of blood in a smoker's body is not reduced because of nicotine. T/F
v) Carbon monoxide is a harmful gas. T/F
vi) Tar damages lung tissues. T/F
vii) Cigarette smoke does not cause a lung disease known as chronic bronchitis. T/F
viii) In many countries it is against law to sell tobacco to young people. T/F

d) Give an informed personal and analytical response to a variety of texts and provide a
textual reference in support.
It's the ability to read and analyze text in a way that goes beyond just understanding the surface
meaning.
e Analysis: Critically examining the text to understand the author's purpose, arguments, and
potential biases.
« Evaluation: Assessing the evidence used to support claims and the overall credibility of the
source.
e Interpretation: Considering the context in which the text was written and its potential
impact on the reader.
e Inference: Drawing conclusions that are not explicitly stated but implied by the text.
* Synthesis: Connecting the text to your own knowledge and experiences, and to other texts
you've encountered.

Why is critical literacy important?
In today's information age, we are bombarded with messages from various sources. Critical
literacy empowers you to:

® Distinguish fact from opinion: Not everything you read is objective truth. Critical
literacy helps you identify the author's perspective and potential biases.

¢ Evaluate information sources: It equips you to assess the credibility of websites, articles,
and other forms of media. :
¢ Form your own opinions: By critically analyzing information, you can develop well-
_  eeUEEEEEIEEEEEEed
76

--- PAGE 77 ---
informed beliefs and avoid blindly accepting what you read or hear.

* Become an active participant in society: Critical literacy skills enable you to engage in
meaningful discussions and debates around important issues.

Activity: It is an activity about informed personal and analytical response to a variety of

texts and provide a textual reference in support.

‘

1. Choose a text: Select a piece of writing to analyze, such as a news article, blog post, poem,
or short story.

2. Textual information:
e Title:
e Author (if available):
e Source (website, book, etc. ):
* Date Published (if available):
Text Analysis:
1, Understanding the text:
¢ Briefly summarize the main ideas and 2r21 iments presented in the text.
¢ Whatis the author's purpose in writing this text? (To inform, persuade, entertain?)
2. Analyzing the author's techniques:

* Identify any literary devices used by the author, such as metaphors, similes, or imagery.
How do these elements contribute to the meaning of the text? (For non- mney texts,
analyze persuasive techniques or language choices)

* Consider the tone of the text (formal, informal, humorous, serious). How does it impact
the reader?

3. Evaluating the source:
* Is the author an expert on the topic? (For non-literary texts, is the source credible?)
« What evidence does the author use to support their claims? Is it reliable and unbiased?
* Can you identify any potential bias in the author's perspective?
4. Critical thinking:
* Does the text make any assumptions about the reader's knowledge or beliefs?
« Whatare the underlying messages or values conveyed by the text?
¢ Does the text raise any questions or challenges to your existing beliefs?
5. Connecting to the world:
* How does this text relate to current events or broader social issues?
* Have you encountered similar ideas or arguinents elsewhere?
* How might the text be interpreted differently by people from different backgrounds?

--- PAGE 78 ---
Reflection:
e What did you learn from critically analyzing this text?
e Howwill you apply critical literacy skills to your future reading and research?

Oral Communication

Speak confidently and fluently in a wide range of contexts, For example, (conflict resolution,
panel discussion, role-play, dialogue, etc.) to fulfill different purposes (exposition,
argumentation etc.).

* Create an informational display about the health hazard. Use internet and library to gather
statistics, photos and other information about how many people all over the world have
fallen prey to this injurious habit.

¢ Find out about the medical facilities in your area---doctors, clinics, hospitals. It would be
ideal if you visit your local hospital.

¢ Speak confidently in a role-play or in panel discussion about the side effects of smoking to
fulfill different purposes (exposition, argumentation etc. ). .

inference
1. Why is it important to do exercise daily?
2. Do you think regular medical check-ups can save us from many ailments?

a) Parts of Speech
Preposition

A preposition is a word or group of words used
before a noun, pronoun, or noun phrase to show
direction, time, place, location, spatial
relationships, or to introduce an object. Some
examples of prepositions are words like “in,” “at,”
“on,” "of," and “to.”

Direction Prepositions

Point towards a direction.
Examples; “to the store*, “from the
house’

Activity: Draw a circle around the correct
preposition in parentheses in the following
paragraphs:

1. John Doe, who graduated (of, from) the
University of North Carolina two years ago, is
now doing graduate work (in, on) engineering
(at, to) Georgia Tech. He expects to receive his Master's degree (by, in) next June. After that,
he plans to accept a job (as, like) a technician (by, with) an oil company (in, at) South America.
2. Jim was walking (across, over) the campus (in, at) noon when he met a friend whom he had
not seen (since, during) summer. They stopped (in front of, around) the gymnasium and sat
down (in, on) the steps. After they had talked (for, during) about ten minutes, Jim said, “I must
go (toward, to) Jefferson Hall this semester. Why don't you drop by some afternoon (over,
after) classes?”

ownership or possession,
“of the company”, “with a
key"

Denote
Examples:

“as brave as a tion”

78

--- PAGE 79 ---
b) Tenses
Past Tense and its kinds

Subject + Past Participle (V2) + Object
Example

© We met in front of the school.
* | bought a new phone,

<F-
Sub. + was/were + Present Participle +
Object

* Thoy were playing soccer
when it started to rain.

Sub. + had + Past Participle (V3)+ Object
Example

* We had taken a shower before
| woke up this morning

Sub. + had + been + V1 {-ing)+ Object

Example
* She had been studying abroad
for several years.

https://leverageedu.com/explore/learn-english/past-tense/

Activity: Use all four past tenses (Simple Past, Past Progressive, Past Perfect,

Past Perfect Progressive) to write a short story about a memorable event in
your life. | ;

»~o

Gather relevant information from multiple authentic available resources following research
ethics to write and present their assignment

- 4, Start with Reliable Sources:

¢ Academic journals: Look for peer-reviewed journals in your field through library
databases or publisher websites. These are scholarly publications where experts review
research before it's published.

* Books by established authors: Opt for books published by reputable presses and written
by recognized experts in the field. Check author credentials and publication dates for
recent information.

79.

--- PAGE 80 ---
¢ Government websites: Utilize official websites of government agencies, research
institutions, and reputable NGOs for factual data and statistics.

* Credible News Sites: Look for established news organizations with a reputation for
accuracy and fact-checking.

2. Evaluate source credibility:

e Author expertise: Check the author's qualifications and background. Are they an expert in
the field?

¢ Publication date: Ensure the information is current. Depending on your topic, older
sources might not be relevant.

¢ Publisher reputation: Opt for publications by reputable publishers or universities known
for rigorous standards.

e Evidence and citations: Does the source provide evidence to support claims? Are sources
cited properly?
© Objectivity: Does the source present a balanced view or is it biased?
3. Use information ethically:

* Quoting and paraphrasing: Always cite your sources when using another's ideas or even
specific wording (quotations). Paraphrasing requires proper citation as well.

e Avoiding plagiarism: Present your own understanding of the information. Don't copy
someone else's work and claim it as your own.

e Fair and balanced representation: Acknowledge different viewpoints on your topic and
present them fairly.

e Permissions: If you're using copyrighted material (images, videos, etc.), obtain
permission from the copyright holder.

4. Tools to help:

¢ Citation generators: Use citation management tools like Zotero or Mendeley to organize
your sources and generate citations in different styles (APA, MLA, etc.).

¢ Library resources: Librarians are experts at helping you find reliable sources and
understand proper citation practices.

Activity: Gather relevant information from multiple authentic available resources
following research ethics about Drug Addiction, its causes, disadvantages and solution
to write and present their assignment.

Teacher's Note
Ask them to give an informed personal and analytical response to a variety of texts and
provide a textual reference in support.

Let them demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written
communication in varying degrees of complexity.

Ask them to use all types of tenses correctly in speech and writing.

Let them gather relevant information from multiple authentic available resources following
research ethics to write and present their assignment.

--- PAGE 81 ---
THE SEA

James Reeves

After completing this lesson, you will be able to:

use complex questions for a range of audiences.
read with accurate pronunciation, appropriate pitch and voice variation suitable for fictional and
nonfictional texts.
read, view and analyse a variety of reading grade-appropriate and high-interest books and texts
from print and non-print sources:

a. Poetry (free verse, narrative and rhythmic

demonstrate understanding of figurative language, word relationships, and nuances in word
meanings.

a. Analyze nuances in the meaning of words with similar denotations.

demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written communication in
varying degrees of complexity

use all types of tenses correctly in speech and writing.
use paraphrasing skills to paraphrase a poem.
use summary skills to write an objective summary of the given text and poems.

--- PAGE 82 ---
*. we ee"

te ’ « a

Soe eee EEF ep
<o-Ssome ©, © Pre-Reading

ite. ri -

‘| Notes and Comments aa a
'| James Morris Reeves (1st July, 1909 - 1st May, 1978) was a British writer, principally known for his | >

_| wikipedia.thefree encyclopedia

| Theme

oon ges
~~ we” = 2, a4

* - mogwnme

a) What makes nature poems appealing to the reader?

va b) Have you ever thought of comparing sea waves with an object?

The sea is a hungry dog,

Giant and grey.

He rolls on the beach all day.

With his clashing teeth and shaggy jaws

Hour upon hour he gnaws

The rumbling, tumbling stones, m

And ‘Bones, bones, bones, bones!’

The giant, sea dog moans, While-reading

Licking his greasy paws. What really makes the ®
stones move?

And when the night wind roars
And the moon rocks in the stormy cloud,
He bounds to his feet and snuffs and stiffs,
Shaking his wet sides over the cliffs,

And howls and hollos long and loud.

But on quiet days in May or June,
When even the grasses on the dune

Play no more their reedy tune,

With his head between his paws

He lies on the sandy shores,

So quiet, so quiet, he scarcely snores. °
(James Reeves)

© Post-reading

Recite the poem” The Sea” with accurate pronunciation, appropriate pitch and voice for
demonstrating variation suitable for fictional and nonfictional texts

poetry, plays and contributions to children’s literature. His published books include poetry, stories | i
and anthologies for both adults and children. He was also known as a literary critic and broadcaster. | ~

The main theme of the poem The Sea’ is the power and playfulness of nature, represented here
by the sea. The sea is described as a hungry dog. The poet's imagination and acute perception | ‘
have transformed the sea into a hungry dog. ¢

SE

--- PAGE 83 ---
“7

Figures of Speech in the Poem

The Sea” uses a number of figures of speech to bring the sea to life. Here are some of the
most notable:
¢ Metaphor: The most prominent figure of speech in the poem is the metaphor that

compares the sea to a dog. The poem speaks of the sea's “teeth,” its “hunger,” and how
it “moans” and “howls.” This metaphor helps the reader to imagine the sea as a powerful
and sometimes dangerous creature.
Personification: In addition to the metaphor, the poem also uses personification to give
the sea human-like qualities. The sea is said to be “restless,” “calm,” and "at peace.”
These qualities are not things that the sea literally possesses, but they help the reader
to understand the different moods of the sea.
Onomatopoeia: The poem uses onomatopoeia to create sounds associated with the sea.
Words like “rumbling,” “tumbling,” “clashing,” “moans,” and “howls” all help the reader to
hear the waves crashing, the wind blowing, and the sea itself making noises.

Simile: The poem also uses a simile to compare the calm sea to a dog that is “quiet, so
quiet, hardly snoring.” This simile helps to reinforce the image of the sea as a peaceful
creature.

Nuances

It refers to the subtle differences and layers of meaning that can be found in something. It adds
depth and complexity to communication.

Here are some key things to remember about nuances:

e Subtlety: Nuances are not always obvious. They're the hidden details, the slight
variations in tone, or the underlying meanings that might not be immediately apparent.

Importance: Even though they're subtle, nuances can be very important. They can
shape how we understand something, how we react to it, and the overall impression we
get.
Across Different Fields: Nuances exist in many areas beyond language. You can find
nuances in art, music, emotions, social interactions, and even physical movements. A
painter might use subtle color variations to convey a mood, or a musician might play a
note with a slight bend to create a specific feeling.
Nuances in the poem “The Sea”
There are some interesting nuances in James Reeves’
Duality of the Sea: The poem portrays the sea with a fascinating duality. It's a "hungry dog” with
“teeth,” suggesting danger and power. Yet, it can also be “calm” and “at peace,” a source of
tranquility. This reflects the sea's ability to be both beautiful and destructive, a force that both
inspires awe and caution.
© Shifting Moods: Tiie poem doesn't present the sea in a static state. Through the use of
verbs like “restless,” “calm,” and "roaring," it captures the sea's ever-changing moods.
This dynamism reflects the unpredictable nature of the sea, constantly moving and
responding to external forces.

--- PAGE 84 ---
e¢ Sound and silence: The onomatopoeia highlights the loudness of the sea when it's
restless, with “rumbling,” “tumbling,” and “clashing.” However, the simile comparing the
calm sea to a “quiet... hardly snoring” dog suggests a contrasting silence. This creates a
sense of potential within the calmness, a hint that the tranquility might not be
permanent.

* Open-ended interpretation: The poem doesn't explicitly state the speaker's
relationship with the sea. Is it one of fear, respect, or even admiration? This ambiguity
allows the reader to project their own feelings onto the poem, creating a more personal
experience.

<_—
<

ords Meanings

Synonvins
tumbles, usually on a mat or ground

a prolonged, low, inarticulate sound as if from physical |

or mental suffering

to draw in through nose by inhaling
to draw air through the nose in short, audio inhalation

like a straight stalk of various tall grasses. A reedy
marsh

Mild

|

“Giant and grey”. What two qualities of the sea is the poet emphasizing?

Write down some common qualities of the sea and a dog.

‘Shaking his wet sides over the cliffs’---What is the sea doing?

‘And howls and hollos long and loud’----What aspect of the sea the poet is emphasizing?
identify the time when the sea is calm and quiet.

State the feelings of the dog in the third verse.

Describe the picture of the sea as portrayed in the poem.

Compare the changes in the state of the sea when it is wild and when it is quiet.

SCA er PS YP

--- PAGE 85 ---
b) Choose the best answer.
i) Man can possibly control nature by
a) having general knowledge of the world
b) predicting earthquakes, hurricanes, volcanic eruptions and floods
c) progress in science and technology
ii) Mentioning the months of May and June means
a) the water tides are rough
b) the sea is tired like a dog
c) these are hot months
iii) By calling the sea a hungry dog, the poet means
a) the sea is howling
b) the sea is alive
c) the sea, like a barking dog is making noise
iv) By describing the sea ‘clashing teeth’, the poet means
a) the sea is menacing and playful
b) the sea is wild
c) the sea is calm
v) ‘Resting with his head in his paws’ means
a) the sea is tired and calm
b) the sea is not in a good mood
c) the sea is rough

e Read the poem loud. Remember that reading poems is different from prose. Like fiction,
poems mostly do not have many characters. Even if you do not understand the meanings, it
gives you pleasure while reading. ,

e Discuss whatever you have understood and what you think is the message in the poem.

e The teacher must explain that on one side Sea seems to be the focal point in the poem and
on the other hand words like ‘giant, grey, teeth, jaws, bones, dog’, combine to reveal a
different side of nature, totally different from our imagination.

¢ Divide the students in different groups. Description of the sea as a hungry dog implicates
that the sea is alive. The students will discuss and come up with their views. It would create
more interest if they suggest more comparisons possible to the sea.

e Discuss the message of the poem.
Inference
i) Is nature the best manifestation of Allah Almighty? Give your opinion.
ii) How would you describe your feelings on watching a rough sea?

TE nnn
85

--- PAGE 86 ---
a) Parts of Speech
Interjection
An interjection is a word or phrase that is grammatically independent from the words around
it, and mainly expresses feeling rather than meaning. Oh, what a beautiful house! Uh-oh, this
looks bad.
Examples:

e Hurray! We won the match.

* Ouch! That really hurt badly.

* Wow! That is a beautiful dress indeed.

* Oh my God! That was unexpected.

e Whoa! That guy is unbelievably huge.

interjection Types
Primary interjection. Pg. Secondary Interjection Volitive interjection

Words and phrases e Oh! Words and phrases © Ah! Words and express Come on!
used to express sirong used to express milder a desire or an urgent
emotions, such as ° Wow! emotions, such as *Hmm. request. Look out!
surprise, joy, anger, OF e Hurrah! disappointment, © Hmmph. Help!
disgust. surprise, or joy. They can usually found

® Awful! ® Oops. at the beginning of a Stop!
They can stand alone |  Theycanstand alone » sentence and followed
orbeattachedtoa = *° orn! Ah well. by an exclamation aw
sentence. e Yikes! ® Aha! mark. Let's go!

‘Different Emotive:Interjections

it's very Common to use intejecbons specifically
for 86 we can divide English
interjections by the kind of emotion they display
and how strong it is.

Let's first take a look at different omotons
we might want to express.

ie

Activity: Match the interjection on the left with the emotion it expresses on
the right.

E ns
Wow Disappointment
Ouch Surprise
Yippee! Excitement
Alas! Agreement

_ Bravo! Happiness

Hey Pain
Uh-oh Disapproval
Hush Encouragement
Goodness gracious! Fear

--- PAGE 87 ---
b) Tenses
Future tense and its kinds

Future Tense

Parts Structure Examples

Future Will go. ;
Simple/Iindefinte 5+ wil + ¥'+ 00) He will go
Future I will be going.
Future They will have gone.
Future Perfect S + will have been + V(ing) + They will have going.
Continuous Obj She will have been gone.

Activity: Complete the sentences with the correct future form of the verbs given.
1. My father hasn't got much hair. He____....._ (lose) it all soon.

2. In 150 years, men (likely /be) bald,

3. When I've savedsomemoney,|____==—=—==—— (bury) anew pad.

4. Everybody expects the owners_____(sign) the agreement with Bill Gate’s company.
5. Becareful. Geminis__ oo. =. ~~ ——_—s(have) money problems this week.

6. Don't phone me this evening. |_. = ¥._—=>_s (Stuy) for my English exam.

7. Let's have asnack. Dinner___ Ss (not. be) ready for another hour.
8.What?0K,!|_—C‘CCN( fix) it'in.' a minute.

9. I'll clean the house before mum__$_ Ss (Come).
10. The water is already very hot. It c (boil) in a minute.
11. Lucky you! At this time tomorrow, you |

12. (swim) in the Caribbean!

13. ifyou__. sa (believe) that you will pass the test, you (get) it.
14.) (0 trekking) in Mexico next month.

15. Inahundred years, the ice caps (melt) unless we stop the global warming.

a) Paraphrase the poem “The Sea” stanza wise.
b) Use summary skills to write the objective summary of this poem.

Teacher's Note
Motivate them to read, view and analyse a variety of reading grade-appropriate and high-interest books
_ and texts from print and non-print sources:
a. Poetry (free verse, narrative and rhythmic
Ask them to demonstrate understanding of figurative language, word relationships, and nuances in word
meanings.
Analyze nuances in the meaning of words with similar denotations.
Help them to demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written
communication in varying degrees of complexity
Ask them to use all types of tenses correctly in speech and writing.
Help them to use paraphrasing skills to paraphrase a poem to use summary skills to write an objective
summary of the given text and poems.

--- PAGE 88 ---
A =

“First Year At Harrow

Sir Winston S. Churchill

After completing this lesson, you will be able to:

listen to texts and critically analyse the situations/events.

engage in extended discussions and critique taking into account other speakers’ viewpoints and
presenting one's own with clarity and coherence.

use pre-reading and while-reading strategies to analyse and explore different layers of meaning
within texts including biases and opinions.

Ask and answer higher-order questions to guide/assess reading(e. g., Why is the author saying this
right now? Why did the author choose this word? How is this different from what | read somewhere

else?

evaluate different points of view (e.g., first-person, third-person narrative) examine an author's
point of view or purpose in a text. Critique how the author distinguishes his or her position from that
of others.

use gerunds, infinitives, and participles.

demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written communication in

varying degrees of complexity.
write multiple paragraphs of free writing for fluency, creativity, brainstorming or pleasure.

Proofread and edit texts for errors in;

* sentence structure.

+ subject/verb agreement.

* noun/pronoun agreement.

* reference words, connectives/transitional devices.

* punctuation and spelling.

--- PAGE 89 ---
© Pre-Reading a
a) Howdo good educational institutions groom the students?
b) What sort of questions are asked by your examiners?

| had scarcely passed my twelfth birthday when | entered the inhospitable regions of
examinations, through which for the next seven years | was destined to journey. These
examinations were a great trial to me. The subjects which were dearest to the examiners were
almost invariably those | fancied least. | would have liked to have been examined in history,
poetry and writing essays. The examiners, on the other hand, were partial to Latin and
mathematics. And their will prevailed. Moreover, the questions which they asked on both these
subjects were almost invariably those to which | was unable to suggest a satisfactory answer. |
should have liked to be asked to say what | knew. They always
tried to ask what | did not know. When | would have willingly ( While-reading
displayed my knowledge, they sought to expose my ignorance. ,
This sort of treatment had only one result; | did not do well in _— — ee
partial to?
examinations.
This was specially true of the entrance examination to Harrow. The Headmaster, Mr. Welldon,
however, took a broad minded view of my Latin prose: he showed discernment judging my general
ability. This was the more remarkable, because | was found unable to answer a single question in
the Latin paper. | wrote my name at the top of the page. | wrote down the number of the question
‘1’. After much reflection | put a bracket round it thus'(1)'. But there after | could not think of
anything connected with it that was either relevant or true. Incidentally there arrived from now
herein particular a blot and several smudges. | gazed for two whole hours at this sad spectacle:
and then merciful ushers collected my piece of foolscap with all the others and carried it up to the
Headmaster’s table. It was from these slander indications of scholarship that Mr. Welldon drew
the conclusion that | was worthy to pass into Harrow. It is very much to his credit. It shows that he
was a man capable of looking beneath the surface of things: a man not dependent on paper
manifestations. | have always had the greatest regard for him.

In consequence of his decision, | was in the course placed in the third, or the lowest division of the
Fourth, or bottom, Form. The names, of the new boys were printed in the selected list in
alphabetical order and my correct name, Spencer-Churchill, began with an, 'S'. | gained no more
advantage from the alphabet. than from the wide sphere of

letters. | was in fact only two from the bottom of the whole | While-reading
school; and these two, | regret to say, disappeared almost | What was Churchill's
immediately through illness or some other cause. position in the class?

| continued in this unpretentious situation for nearly a year, by being so long in the lowest form I
gained an immense advantage over the cleverer boys. They all went on to learn Latin and Greek
and splendid things like that. But | was taught English. We were considered such dunces that we
could learn only English. Mr. Somervell---a most delightful man, to whom my debt is great----was
charged with the duty of teaching the stupidest boys the most disregarded thing---namely, to
write mere English. He knew how to do it. He taught it as no one else has ever taught it. Not only
did we learn English parsing thoroughly, but we also practised continually English analysis. Mr.
Somervell had a system of his own. He took a fairly long sentence and broke it up into its

a DDD
89

--- PAGE 90 ---
components by means of black, red, blue and green inks: R

Subject, Verb, Object, Relative Clauses, Conditional Clauses, pilessieaaee

Conjunctive and Disjunctive Clauses! Each had its colour and its Why was Churchill indebted
bracket. It was a kind of drill. E did it almost daily. As | remained \ to Mr. Somervell?

in the Third three times as long as anyone else, | has three times

as much of it. | learned it thoroughly. Thus, | got into my bones the essential structure of the
ordinary British sentence---which is a noble ine) And when in after years my school fellows who
had won prizes and distinction for a ee. A AY al .

writing such beautiful Latin poetry | < * ee er

and pithy Greek epigrams had to
come down again in common
English, to earn their living or
make their way, | did not feel
myself at any disadvantage.
Naturally | am biased in favour of
boys learning English. | would make
them all learn English: and then |
would let the clever ones learn
Latin as an honour, and Greek as a
treat. But the only thing | would
whip them for is not knowing
English. | would whip them hard for
that.

© Post-reading
Give your view point about learning English.

Notes and Comments

Sir Winston S. Churchill (30" November, 1874---24thn January, 1965) was a British statesman,
soldier and writer who twice served as Prime minister of the United Kingdom, from 1940 to 1945
during the second World war, and again from 1951 to 1953. He is rated as the most famous
politicians of all, twice politician and an inspirational leader in time of war. He led Britain to
victory in World war Two. Churchill remains to this day one of the most popular and significant
figures in political history.

Churchill's strength was his rhetoric. The exhilarating and rousing effect of his sania was
always responded with cheers and applause by the public.

He addressed the nation after Germany surrendered in 1945, by saying, “This is your victory’.
The people replied, “No, it is yours”. Such was the relationship of the public and their wartime
leader.

He was awarded the Nobel prize in literature in 1953 for his many published works.

On 24" January, 1965 his ailing heath took a toll on him and he passed away. Six sovereigns, 15
heads of state and almost 6000 people attended his state funeral.

--- PAGE 91 ---
Theme :

The main theme explored in "First Year at Harrow” by Sir Winston Churchill is the experience of
a young boy entering a prestigious boarding school and the challenges of adapting to a new
environment. Here are some key aspects of the theme:

Culture Shock: Churchill, a young and somewhat sheltered boy, finds himself in a world of strict
discipline, rigorous academics, and a social hierarchy different from anything he's known.
Self-discovery: Through his struggles and triumphs at Harrow, Churchill begins to understand
his strengths and weaknesses, forming the foundation for his future character.

Finding One's Place: The'essay explores the anxieties and uncertainties of fitting in at a new
school, making friends, and finding a sense of belonging.

The value (or lack thereof) of traditional education: Churchill reflects on the emphasis on
classics like Latin and Maths, which he disliked, contrasting it with his own interests in history
and storytelling.

The theme can also be seen through the lens of perseverance and overcoming adversity.
Despite his initial struggles, Churchill eventually finds his footing at Harrow, demonstrating the
importance of resilience in the face of challenges.

Glossary

Meanings Synonyms

uninviting

unwelcoming, hostile

had a taste for

broad minded

Le
[usher | doorkeeper
[stender | thin, small, poor
Te ae | aa

91

--- PAGE 92 ---
pithy * | short, keeping to the point, full of force
short, pointed sayings

have a tendency to favour

thing that gives great pleasure.

Comprehension
a)Answer the following questions.

ow kh WD

8
9

Describe the significance of the First Year at Harrow.

Explain the way themes of resilience and self-discovery or explored.

Write down the reason Churchill could not do well in the examination.

Students can use this chapter for examination. Discuss.

Churchill was taught English at Harrow and not Latin and Greek. Was it a gain or loss?
Highlight the points to prove that ‘First Year at Harrow’ is a compelling read for
students.

Write an appreciation or criticism of Churchill’s views in regard to the study of Latin,
Greek and English.

Relate Mr. Welldon’s importance at Harrow and his judgement about Churchill.
Analyze Mr. Somervell as an English teacher.

b) Choose the best answer for each question.

{;

2.

3.

What was Churchill's general feeling about examinations?
(a) He excelled in them and found them enjoyable.
(b) He found them stressful and struggled to perform well.
(c) He viewed them as a necessary evil for learning.
(d) He had no strong opinion about them.
What subjects were considered most important by the examiners at Harrow?
(a) English and History
(b) Science and Mathematics
(c) Latin and Greek
(d) Art and Music
Why was Churchill placed low on the entrance exam list?
(a) He cheated and was caught.
(b) He excelled in all subjects except English.
(c) He did poorly in most subjects, especially Latin.
(d) He arrived late for the exam.

92

--- PAGE 93 ---
4. In what subject did Churchill excel at Harrow?
(a) Latin
(b) Mathematics
(c) English
(d) History
5. Why did Churchill believe learning English was more valuable than Latin and Greek?
(a) He found English more interesting and enjoyable.
(b) English was necessary for success in all fields.
(c) He believed English was a more practical language.
(d) All of the above
6. What is the main point Churchill is trying to convey in “First Year at Harrow’?
(a) The importance of a good education at a prestigious school.
(b) The limitations of traditional examination systems.
(c) The value of hard work and perseverance in overcoming challenges.
(d) The importance of studying Latin and Greek for success in life.

1. Divide the class in groups to exchange views after listening the text to critically analyse

_ the situations/events about the previous knowledge regarding the personality of Sir S.
Winston Churchill.

2. Engage students in extended discussions and critique taking into account other speakers’
viewpoints and presenting one's own with clarity and coherence about Harrow, location,
country, weather and the living conditions. They should provide authentic information.
The use of a globe can be ideal for the better comprehension of the students.

3. Adebate can be arranged to know the interest of different students in different subjects
and by furnishing reason, it can be an interesting activity,
Inference
4. How difficult it is to settle in a new school, and adjusting with the new environment?
5. Doyou agree that struggle and determination can make things easier?
c) Evaluate different points of view (e.g., first-person, third-person narrative)

examine an author's point of view or purpose in the story. Critique how the author
distinguishes his position from that of others in this story.

93

--- PAGE 94 ---
a) Parts of Speech
Conjunctions

Conjunctions are parts of speech that connect words, phrases, clauses, or sentences. English
has seven coordinating conjunctions—for; and, nor, but, or, yet, so—which you can remember
using the mnemonic FANBOYS: For indicates causation: “We left a day early, for the weather
was not as clement as we had anticipated.”

Conjunctions | Me pak er

Coordinating Conjunctions | } Subordinating Conjunctions Correlative Conjunctions
Coordinating conjunctions Subordinating conjunctions are Correlative conjunctions
coordinate or join two or parts of speech that join ' f correlate, working in pairs to
more sentences, main dependent clauses to join phrases or words that

clauses, words, or other independent clauses. These carry equal i —
parts of speech which are of important word and phrases may ae Gaeuitiee ee bo t
the same syntactic ~ introduce adverb clauses. ig pa

after, although, as, as soon as speech, correlative

importance. because, before, by the time conjunctions are fun to use.

F=for even if, even though, every as / as, both /and
A=and time + either / or, hardly / when
N=nor if, in case, now that, once + ff / then, just as / so

+ since, so that, than, the first * neither / nor, not only /
B=but time but also
O=or * unless, until, when, no sooner / than, not / but
Y=yet whenever rather / than, scarcely /
S=so : * whether or not, while, why when

what with / and, whether /

or

www.esikidsworld.com

Activity: Identify the conjunction in each sentence and determine its type
(coordinating, subordinating, or correlative).

My friend and | are going to the park.

She will go to the store after she finishes her homework.

Neither my sister nor | like sushi.

He is both tall and athletic.

| wanted to go to the concert, but | couldn't get tickets.

We can go to the beach if the weather is nice.

She likes both chocolate and vanilla ice cream.

He went to the party although he wasn't feeling well.

You can have either cake or ice cream for dessert.
10. They can play outside when they finish thelr chores.

PEnNeVawny

94

--- PAGE 95 ---
b) Adverb

An adverb is a word that modifies (describes) a verb (“he sings loudly”), an adjective (“very tall”),
another adverb (“ended too quickly”), or even a whole sentence (“Fortunately, | had brought an
umbrella.”).

“Adverbs and Their Types, Definitions and Examples

Activity: Go through the given sentences and identify the type of adverb
used in each sentence.
. The boy practised his speech regularly.
. The phone kept ringing constantly.
. Those people have gone out.
. | have heard this story before.
. Are you quite sure?
. You are driving too carelessly.
. lalways try my best.
. You are quite right.
. He solved the problem quickly.
. | have heard enough.
11. The boy often makes the same mistake.
12. Why are you still here?
13. | could hardly recognise him.
14. The little kid is too shy to sing.
15. The horse galloped away.

--- PAGE 96 ---
c)Tenses
Gerunds, Infinitives, and Participles

VERBALS DEFINITIONS

Reading improves comprehension skill:
He prefers swimming.

Jogging Is a very good exercise.

His favourite pastime is gardening.

His can't escape from learning.

as the subject of a verb

as the object of a verb

as the subject nominative
as the predicate nominative
as the object of a preposition

as a noun modifiers - Past
Participle (-ed verb)

as a noun modifiers - Past
Participle (-en verb)

as a noun modifiers - Present

Participle (-ing verb)

as anoun - the - subject of a

sentence

as anoun - the - object of a
=jge

as an adjective - noun

modifie

aS an adverb - noun

moqifie

-ing verb

Gerunds acting as a
noun

The injured man was waiting outside.
-ing or -ed/-

en verb
acting as an
adjective

The man with a broken hand waited

Participles

The sleeping dog caused a delay.

To sleep was his greatest need.
I need to goto work.

to anda
verb acting
as a noun,
adjective or
adverb

Infinitives

The way to go Is through the woods.

She loves to talk.

Activity: Read each of the following sentences to determine whether the sentence
contains a gerund, participle, or infinitive. At the left of the number, write G, P, or |.

1) Facing college standards, the students realized that they hadn't worked hard
enough in high school.
2) Swimming in your pool is always fun.
3) The college recommends sending applications early
-4) Mrs. Ali , showing more bravery than wisdom, invited 100 guests to a party.

5) To be great is to be true to yourself and to the highest principles of honor.

6) He won the game by scoring during the overtime period.
7) — Rayyan is expected to program computers at his new job.
8) Her most important achievement was winning the national championship.

9) Going to work today took all my energy.
The student left in charge of the class was unable to keep order.

--- PAGE 97 ---
Commonly used Phrasal verbs
Learn and practice these commonly used phrasal verbs in your daily routine.

Phrasal_ Verb Example Sentence
Addup - Make sense or be logical His story doesn't add up.
Explode or become very angry __| The car blew up after the crash.

Bring out Highlight or publish The event brought out the best in
her.
Continue doing something She carried on with her studies
despite problems.
Perform or complete a task The experiment was carried out.
successfully.

Examine or leave a place ou should check out that book!
Come across Find something by chance came across an old photo.:
Think of an idea or solution he came up with a brilliant plan.

Stop or disconnect _3 | The phone was cut-off during the
call. ,
Leave someone or something I'll drop you off at the station.
somewhere
Fall apart Break into pieces or become The chair fell apart after years of
emotionally unstable use.

Have a disagreement They fell out over a trivial issue.
Complete a form Please fill in this application form.

Have a good relationship They get along well with each other.

“

= 2| $s 5

The thief managed to get away.
He finally gave in to their demands.
You can go ahead with your plan.
Let's go over the report again.
Hang on! I'll be right there.
They like to hang out at the mall.
Hold on while | find the information.

“

Review or examine something
Wait for a short time
Spend time socially

a

Maintain the same level It's hard to keep up with him. 1.8
Let down Disappoint someone Don't let me down this time.

Investigate We need to look into this matter
further.

He passed out from exhaustion.

Pickup si Collect someone or something —_| I'll pick you up at 8 PM. ., ,.

Put up with Tolerate She can't put up with her friend's
behavior anymore.

Task: Search and learn more phrasal verbs with their meanings and learn them for daily use.

97

--- PAGE 98 ---
Multiple paragraphs of free writing for fluency, creativity, brainstorming or pleasure

)" THE WRITING PROCESS

Brainstorm
ideas and

organize
your topic.

Create a rough
copy of your
writing,

Improve your
writing.

Proofread
your work,

Create a
clean final

copy.

Vv

TIPS FOR THE WRITER

‘Think about what you want to say.

Talk about your ideas with a friend
to find a main idea.

Use a list or web to organize your
ideas.

Write your ideas in order.

Read your work out loud and note’
places where you stumble. .
Ask a friend for his or her feedback.

Try out different beginnings and
endings.

Use quotes or add dialogue.
Include descriptive words.

Add detail to develop important
parts.

Make sure you have complete
sentences, correct spelling, and
necessary capitalization and
punctuation.

Reread to see if each sentences
make sense, 3
Ask a friend to proofread your work.

Type your writing or copy it neatly
onto new paper.
Think of an interesting title.

Share your writing.

--- PAGE 99 ---
Sentences structure
A simple sentence structure has one independent clause: “Il rode my bike.” A compound

sentence has at least two independent clauses: “I got in my car, and | drove into town.” In that

sentence, both clauses can stand on their own as complete sentences.

Subject/verb agreement

Verbs must agree with subjects in number and in person (1st/2nd/3rd). EXAMPLE: The dog

drinks his water every day. “Dog” is a singular subject; “drinks” is a singular present tense verb.

Acommon mistake in S-V Agreement is to assume that present tense verbs ending in “s” (ex:

drinks, runs, dances) are plural.

Noun/pronoun agreement

Pronoun/Noun (Antecedent) Agreement Pronouns always take the place of a noun. The noun is

referred to as the antecedent of the pronoun and the pronoun must agree with the noun that

the pronoun replaces. When we refer to agreement, we are referring to number, person, and

gender.

Reference words, connectives/transitional devices

Words or phrases used to create logical links between sentences, paragraphs, and sections of a

paper. For example: The proposed solution to the problem did not work. Therefore, we

attempted a second solution. However, this solution was also unsuccessful.

Write multiple paragraphs in an essay about “My First Day at College” of free writing for fluency,
creativity, brainstorming or pleasure. Proofread and edit text of this essay for errors in ;

sentence structure.

subject/verb agreement.

noun/ pronoun agreement.

reference words, connectives/transitional devices

Teacher's Note °

* Help them to use gerunds, infinitives, and participles.

* Ask them to demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written -
communication in varying degrees of complexity.

* Let them write multiple paragraphs of free writing for fluency, creativity, brainstorming or
pleasure,
Proofread and edit texts for errors in ;

sentence structure.

subject/verb agreement.

noun/ pronoun agreement.

reference words, connectives/transitional devices.

--- PAGE 100 ---
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:

¢ demonstrate attentive listening’ skills while working in a whole class setting and taking turns to
‘ speak with standard pronunciation.

respond to questions on a range of communicative purposes.
analyse organisational patterns in a text:
a. list/ sequence of ideas/ events comparison-contrast
b. cause-effect
c. problem-solution
d. reasons/ assumptions-conclusion

use pre-reading and while-reading strategies to analyse and explore different layers of meaning
within texts including biases and opinions. Read and use inference and deduction to recognise
implicit meaning (e.g. look for supporting details within a text/paragraph) using prior
knowledge and contextual cues effectively.

distinguish cause from effect, fact from opinion (e.g., by noting outcomes, personal comments,
beliefs and biases), and generalized statements from evidence-based information with specific
reference to informational texts.

use the aspect of time correctly in speech and writing.
write a book review report

--- PAGE 101 ---
© wemneens:
a) Doyouhaveany knowledge of the planets and holes in ozone layer?

b) Howdowe benefit with scientific advancement in our daily life?

Oe Se eT ee ee ee er ee

A computer-generated image of TrES-2. TrES-2 is a gas
planet like Jupiter, but it is larger.

An international team of astronomers has discovered a
planet slightly larger than Jupiter that orbits a star 500
light years from Earth. A super-duper telescope was not
even required; they found the planet using several small
telescopes much like those used by amateur astronomers.
The new planet is named TrES-2 because it is the second
such planet found by scientists working on the Trans-Atlantic Exoplanet Survey (TrES). It is a
transiting planet, meaning it can be seen transiting, or moving, across the star it orbits.

Ted Dunham, an instrument scientist at Arizona's Lowell Observatory, says transiting planets are
special because researchers can answer a lot of questions about them. All it takes is some math and
some observations about the planet and its relationship to its star.

Some key questions: How big is it? How long is it's year (the time it takes to orbit around its star)?
How much would you weigh if you were there?

“TrES-2 is a little bigger than Jupiter, has a ‘year’ that is a little less than two and a half days, and isa
little more massive than Jupiter,” explains Dunham.
From its mass and radius (the distance across the planet) | While-reading

scientists can figure out the density of the planet—whether it is | How can scientists figure out
made of rock, gas, or a combination of the two. (TrES-2 is made | the density of the planet?
up mainly of gas).

They can also work out the surface gravity, says Dunham: “You would feel a little more than twice
as heavy as on Earth if you were on TrES-2.”

There's a catch, though. “The temperature is about 1,500 ii Celsius (2,732 degrees
Fahrenheit), and there is nothing solid to stand on. It isn’t a likely place to look for life,” he says.

Dunham says that to find smaller planets like Earth or Venus, scientists need to send instruments
on a mission to space. NASA scientists are planning “The Kepler Mission” pwhich could begin in two
years. 4

TrES-2 is in the part of the sky that the Kepler Mission will study. Since astronomers already know
so much about it, they can use it to help make sure their instruments are working.

“It's really a blast to be working on finding planets orbiting other stars,” says Dunham. “People
have wondered for millennia whether there are other planets like ours, maybe with living things
on them. The next ten years should be fun. Stay tuned!”

Year for Ozone hole

Ozone, a gas that is produced naturally up in the stratosphere, While-reading
surrounds the Earth like a protective blanket. This ozone layer
keeps us safe because it absorbs many of the sun's harmful
ultraviolet (UV) rays.

How does Ozone layer keep
us safe?

101

--- PAGE 102 ---
But that protective blanket gets holes in it because of man-made chemicals known as ozone-
depleting substances—ODS for short—which destroy ozone and our protection from UV rays.

Scientists report that this year the hole over Antarctica is a record-breaker: “From September 21
to 30, the average area of the ozone hole was the largest ever observed at 10.6 million square
miles (27.4 million square kilometers),” said atmospheric scientist Paul Newman with NASA's
Goddard Space Flight Center.

That's larger than the surface area of North America. The hole is also the deepest ever recorded.

Two things account for the record-breaking hole. The first is that even though more than 180
countries agreed to phase out ODS use in 1987, there are still a lot of these substances up in the
stratosphere from years past. That's because they last a long, long time, some of them more than
a hundred years.

The second factor has to do with clouds and cold temperatures over the South Pole.

“The polar stratosphere is a very cold, dry place,” explains Newman. “It is hard for clouds to form
there. But polar stratospheric clouds form when it gets extremely cold: minus 109 degrees
Fahrenheit (minus 78 degrees
Celsius).” Newman says that’s when
some interesting chemistry takes
place: “The cloud releases chlorine
in a form that rapidly destroys
ozone.”

The good news, however, is that the
situation would be a lot worse if
people hadn't started doing things to
protect the ozone layer. By the year
2070, the big ozone holes will be a
thing of the past, predicts Newman.

© Post-reading
How do polar stratospheric clouds form?

Notes and Comments

Catherine Clark Fox is a graduate of the University of Virginia. She launched her career as a
researcher for National Geographic magazine, and earned a Publications Specialists Certificate
from George Washington University.

She is a freelance writer and editor, has composed fresh, dynamic newsletters, Press releases,
and fact sheets. This extract has been taken from National Geographic.

Theme

To bring awareness of the latest science discoveries is the main theme. This report will enhance
students’ interest to know more about Planets and Ozone.

102

--- PAGE 103 ---
Glossary

Word Meaning Synonyms

Jamateur___| onewho engages ina pursuit, study orsportasapastime | unprofessional
[density | thequantityperunitvolume, unitareaorunittength |
depleting | tolessenmarkedlyin quantity content, powerorvalue |
Jaravity | gravity serioussituationorproblem |
[Jupiter | thelargestplanet, andfifthinorderofthesun |
[massive large, sotidorheavyinstructure |
feminine ie a a aie |

stratosphere | thehighestregiononagradedscale |
jtrans___| processofpassingthroughorover |
BSC

situated beyond the visible spectrum at its violet end

Comprehension
a) Answer the following questions.
Name the founder of the new planet TrES-2.
The transiting planets are special. Give reasons.
Mention the temperature on TrES-2.
According to the author, next ten years should be fun. Give reasons.
How can study of planets provide interesting information about Earth?
Describe the source the earth is surrounded like.a protective blanket.
Why is it difficult for clouds to form at the Polar Stratosphere?
Highlight the Newman's prediction about ozone by the year 2070.
Justify that ozone layer is important for human life. Distinguish cause from effect, fact
from opinion (e.g., by noting outcomes, personal comments, beliefs and biases), and
generalized statements from evidence-based information with specific reference to
effects of global warming on Ozone Layer.
b) Analyse organisational patterns in atext keepingin mind: -
a. list/ sequence of ideas/ events comparison-contrast
b. cause-effect
c. problem-solution
d. reasons/ assumptions-conclusion |
c) Complete the given sentences with suitable words.
a) Dark Blankets get aholein
b) TrES-2 isa gas planet like

OP SP Fre ES

ee eee
103

--- PAGE 104 ---
c) TrEs-2ismadeup mainly of______.

d) account for record-breaking hole.
e) Thesecond factor has todo WER ne
f) It's__ Ss for clouds to form there.

g) Thecloud releases in a form that rapidly destroys ozone.

h) Bythe year 2070, the big ozone holes will be a thing of the ,
d, Astronomy is a branch of science which tells about moon, stars, etc. The word Star’ has
been used in the unit. Consult a dictionary and tell the difference between astronomy and
astrology.

Oral Communication

Respond to questions on a range of communicative purposes.
e Arrange aquizzactivity by forming groups of four or five students.
e Theycan take help from Internet tg collect information about Suparco and Nasa.
e What is the purpose of these organizations?
e After sharing the views with others, a presentation will add to the knowledge of the
students.

Inference
1 Doyou think study of Planets will give us interesting information about Earth?
2  Doyou think ozone layer is important for human life?

Activity: "Discussion Circle"Students sit in a circle, taking turns to add one sentence to a group
discussion about ‘ Human Plans to Live on Mars’ , using clear pronunciation. After completing the
discussion, they summarize it, emphasizing attentive listening and incorporating previous
details.

Grammar and Vocabulary
a) Aspect of time correctly in speech and writing

Grammar and usage Tense and aspect are different grammatical
Tense and Aspect categories, but they always come together in
_ Tenses: Present/Present perfect a given phrase.
Past/Past perfect
Future/Future perfect As a practical approach to language usage,
Aspects: Common we don’t mention tense or aspect, we rather
Peogressive speak of the following structures:

Present simple | always go out on Saturday evenings.
(present tense+common aspect) She never gets up early in the morning.
(Progressive aspect

Present progressive I'm sitting here and listening to you. fs ‘continuous®
(present tense+progressive aspect) Look out, it’s raining. in several textbooks.)

Past simple | played tennis with Sheila yesterday..
(past tense+common aspect) Grandfather came home early last night.

--- PAGE 105 ---
Past progressive We were playing football at six yesterday.
(past tense+progressive aspect) She was studying English from six to seven.
Present perfect simple Sorry, I’ve broken your glasses.

Have you done your homework (yet)?

Present perfect progressive We've been living here for ten years.
(present perfect tense+progressive aspect) | She has been playing the guitar all this morning.

Past perfect simple She said she had written three letters the day before.
past perfect tense+common aspect) We had lived in Oxford before we moved to London.

Past perfect progressive She said she had been playing tennis all that morning.
(past perfect tense+progressive aspect) How long had you been staying here when the rain started}
Future simple | will be thirty years old next year.

(future tense+common aspect) Our train will leave at 7:30 tomorrow.

Future progressive This time tomorrow we’ || be flying to Los Angeles.
(future tense+progressive aspect) What will you be doing at six tomorrow?

(future perfect tense+c ) | will have finished this work by the end of next week.

Future perfect progressive We'll have been staying here for two weeks by next Friday.

3
a
8
8
3
3
g
3

-

3
H
s
r]
>

2
|
;
§
3
3
;
i

Activity: Read each sentence carefully and choose the correct tense or time
marker to complete the sentence accurately.

1) Sarah____s_s (read/reads) a book every night before bed.

2) Last summer, we_____— (go/ went) camping in the mountains.

3) By the time!|_.__§__ (get/got) home, the party had already started.

4) Next year, ourschool____———_—(celebrate/celebrates) its 50th anniversary.
5) He______ (will finish/will be finishing) his homework when you arrive.

6) Right now, they__._______—s (watch/watches) a movie at the cinema.

7) Yesterday, Maria_________ (bake/baked) a delicious cake for her friend's birthday.

8) In two weeks, we _______ (will go/will be going) on vacation to Murree.
9) By the time you______ (arrive/arrived), | will have already left for the airport.
10) Every morning, the birds____——__ (sing/sings) outside my window.

105

--- PAGE 106 ---
Book Report Outline-

Introductions:
(Title, author’s name, year published,
genre, overall theme)

Body Paragraphs:
(setting, time period, character description,
plot of the story)

Conclusion:
(overall impression of the story, final statement
about whether you’d suggest the book to others)

Book Report
A book report is a written summary and analysis of a book that provides insights into its content,
themes, characters, and overall impact. It's commonly assigned in schools as a way for students to
demonstrate their understanding of a particular book and their ability to critically analyze its
elements. Here are the typical steps involved in writing a book report:
1, Reading the Book: ;
The first step is to thoroughly read the book from beginning to end. Take notes on important plot
points, characters, themes, and any significant quotes or passages.
2. Introduction:
* Provide basic information about the book, including its title, author, genre, and
publication date.
* Briefly introduce the main themes or ideas that the book explores.
3. Summary:
* Summarize the main plot points of the book without giving away the ending.
* Include information about the setting, major characters, and key events that drive the
story forward.

106

--- PAGE 107 ---
* Focuson the most significant aspects of the plot and avoid unnecessary details.
4. Analysis:
« Analyze the themes, characters, and writing style of the book.
* Discuss how the author develops the plot and characters, and how these elements
contribute to the overall message or purpose of the book. .
e Consider the book's strengths and weaknesses, and evaluate its effectiveness in conveying
its intended message or entertaining its audience.
5. Personal Reflection:
e Share your personal thoughts and reactions to the book.
e Discuss what you liked or disliked about the book, and why.

e Reflect.on how the book impacted you and whether it changed your perspective on any
issues or themes.

6. Conclusion:

e Summarize your main points and restate your overall impression of the book.

e Offer recommendations for who might enjoy reading the book and why.

e Endwitha final thought or reflection on the significance of the book.
7. Proofreading and Editing:

e Review your book report for spelling, grammar, and punctuation errors.

e Ensure that your writing is clear, concise, and well-organized.

e Make any necessary revisions to improve the clarity and effectiveness of your report.
8. Citation (if necessary):

Make sure to properly cite the external sources or quotes from the book according to the required
citation style (e.g., MLA, APA).

Activity: Complete a ‘Book Report Worksheet’ following the above mentioned points.

e Title of the Book:
Author: :
Genre: :
e Date Started: :

Date Finished: aoe Lk CS Se  .7 Seer

1, Basic information:

Provide the title and author of the book.

What genre does the book belong to? (e.g., fiction, non-fiction, mystery, fantasy)

2. Summary:

Write a brief summary of the book. Include the main characters, setting, and plot points.

3. Characters:

List and describe the main characters. Include their traits, motivations, and relationships with

a
107

--- PAGE 108 ---
other characters.
4. Setting:

Describe the setting(s) of the story. Include time period, location, and any significant details
about the environment.

5. Plot:
Summarize the main events of the story. What are the key turning points or conflicts?
6. Themes:

identify the main themes or messages conveyed in the book. How are they developed throughout
the story?

7. Personal Response:

Share your personal thoughts and feelings about the book. What did you like or dislike? Would you
recommend it to others? Why or why not?

8. Favorite Quotes:
Select a few memorable quotes from the book and explain why they stood out to you.
9. Comparisons:

Compare this book to others you have read in the same genre or by the same author. How does it
stand out?

10. Overall Evaluation:
Rate the book out of 5 stars and justify your rating with specific examples from the text.
11. Additional Activities (Optional):

Discuss any related activities you did alongside reading the book, such as research, discussions, or
creative projects.

12. Recommendations:

Would you recommend this book to others? If so, who do you think would enjoy it and why?
13. Conclusion:
Sum up your thoughts on the book and conclude your report .

Teacher's Note:

* Ask students to respond to questions on a range of communicative purposes.
+ Motivate them to analyse organisational patterns in a text:

a. list/ sequence of ideas/ events comparison-contrast

b. cause-effect ,

c. problem-solution

d. reasons/ assumptions-conclusion

Encourage them to distinguish cause from effect, fact from opinion (e.g., by noting outcomes,
personal comments, beliefs and biases), and generalized statements from evidence-based
information with specific reference to informational texts.

Help them to use the aspect of time correctly in speech and writing.

Motivate them to write a book review report on their own.

108

--- PAGE 109 ---
HARVEST HYMN

John Betjeman (1906-1984)

After completing this lesson, you will be able to:

demonstrate attentive listening’ skills while working in a whole class setting and taking turns to
speak with standard pronunciation.

read with accurate pronunciation, appropriate pitch and voice variation suitable for fictional and
nonfictional texts.

analyse organisational patterns in a text:
a. list/ sequence of ideas/ events comparison-contrast
b. cause-effect
c. problem-solution
d. reasons/ assumptions-conclusion

verify the preliminary determination of the meaning of a word or phrase (e.g., by checking the
inferred meaning in context or in a dictionary).

identify and use compound prepositions and prepositional phrases in writing
use paraphrasing skills to paraphrase a poem.
use summary skills to write an objective summary of the given text and poems.

--- PAGE 110 ---
© Pre-Reading
a) If youtruly love nature, you will find beauty everywhere? Comment
b) How would you relate the harvesting season with prosperity?

We spray the fields and scatter
The poison on the ground
So that no wicked wild flowers
Upon our farm be found.
We like whatever helps us
To line our purse with pence;
The twenty-four-hour broiler house
And neat electric fence.

All concrete sheds around us
And Jaguars in the yard,

The telly lounge and deep freeze
Are ours from working hard.

We fire the fields for harvest,
The hedges swell the flame,

The oak trees and the cottages

From which our fathers came.
While-reading

We give no compensation, Why do we like whatever
The earth is ours today, helps us?
And if we lose on the arable,
The bungalows will pay.

All concrete sheds around us
And Jaguars in the yard,
The telly lounge and deep freeze
Are ours from working hard.

(John Betjeman)

(ae) Post-reading
Recite the poem with accurate pronunciation, appropriate pitch and voice variation

suitable for it.
SSS

110

--- PAGE 111 ---
Notes and Comments

John Betjman (August 28, 1906-May 19, 1984) was a British poet, writer and broadcaster. He
studied at Oxford.

During World War 2 Benjamin served as United Kingdom attaché to Dublin, as BBC broadcaster
and in the British Council department. His two books revealed him as a serious poet “Old Nights
for New Channels” (1940) and “New Bats in Old Fries” (1945). His poetry was enhanced by a
poem “Summoned by Bells’ (1960).

In 1969, Benjamin was knighted and in 1972 was appointed poet Laureate of Britain. He
suffered from Parkinsons disease for a number of years. He suffered a stroke in 1981 and a heart
attack in 1983. He died in 1984.

Synonyms

Words Meanings

telly television
land that can be cultivated

a) Answer the following questions.

1. Whose voices do we hear in the poem?

2. The first two lines of the poem forcefully convey the meaning. How?

3. Why do you think the speaker in the poem regard wild flowers as “wicked'’?

4. “The hedges swell the flame”. The flame is literal but it also has a metaphorical meaning. What
else does it represent?

5. “The earth is ours today’. In your own words, express the speaker's attitudes to the land.
6. At what cost does man get the luxury items?
7. Which lines indicate the destruction of land and houses of our ancestors?

ie
111

--- PAGE 112 ---
8. How will the bungalows pay for the loss of cultivated land?
9. “All concrete sheds around us”. What is the poet emphasizing through the use of the word ‘all’?
10. What lesson do we learn from the poem ‘Harvest Hymn’?
b) Analyse organisational patterns in a poem while keeping the topic of environmental issue
in mind:

¢ list/ sequence of ideas/ events comparison-contrast

* cause-effect

¢ problem-solution

* reasons/ assumptions-conclusion

Demonstrate attentive listening’ skills while working in a whole class setting and taking
turns to speak with standard pronunciation.

i) Divide the class in groups of four or five students. Then share your views on different
natural resources that our country has.

ii) Discuss the benefits of the natural resources towards the progress of the country.

iii) Audio visual aids can be of great help OR a documentary can be shown for better
comprehension.

iv) Read the poem aloud. Do not forget to lay stress at proper words while reading. That is
known as Intonation.

Focus on the following speaking techniques:
i) Vary the speed of your voice. Slow down to emphasize key words and lines.
ii) Speak every word clearly and distinctively.
iii) Make eye contact with your audience.
iv) Every student should be given a chance to read.

Preposition

Apreposition is a word that shows the relationship between a noun or a pronoun and some other
word in the sentence. It shows direction, time, placeand location.

a) Compound prepositions

A Compound preposition is a preposition that has two or more prepositional words. It can be said
as a combination of words. For example: amidst, above, across, below, between, beneath,
within, without etc. It can be said as a combination of words. It is prepared through the joining of
a prepositional or a non-prepositional word to a simple preposition used with a noun, adverb,
adjective, and pronoun.

Compound prepositions are formed by joining two or three words. The first word is generally an

adverb adjective or conjunction. The second word is a simple preposition.
Three-word compound prepositions have a structure different from the two words compound

prepositions. The first and last words of such prepositions are simple prepositions while the
second word is either a noun or an article.

112

--- PAGE 113 ---
Unit 11: Harvest Hymn

Examples

« According to her principal she is a good student.

+ Thegarden was not clean aside from the cafeteria.
In the first sentence, ‘to’ is considered as a simple preposition. When combined with ‘according’ it
becomes a compound preposition.
In the second sentence, ‘from’ is said to be a preposition. When combined with ‘aside’ it becomes a
combined preposition
TWO-WORD COMPOUND PREPOSITIONS-
According to As for Asto Dueto Insteadof Before Aheadof Asof Apart
from Owingto
As regards
In between
THREE WORD COMPOUND PREPOSITIONS-
Aswellas Becauseof Byvirtueof Duringthecourseof Inaccordancewith Inconjunction
with Inexcess of
Infavorof Inorderto Inreceiptof Withrespectto Withregardto Withreferenceto In
terms of Inthe immediate
1. Onbehalfof Inaidof Infrontof Inrelationto Bymeansof Withrelationto Inline
with Ontopof As far as.
THREE WORD COMPOUND PREPOSITIONS-

1. Heran away from the cat as far asshe could.

2. Her uncle attended the ceremony on behalf of her father.

3. There isa pizza store in front of the park.

Activity: Read each sentence carefully and identify the compound preposition(s)
in each sentence. Then, write the compound preposition(s) you identified.

. The cat jumped over the fence and ran through the field.

. She placed the keys under the mat beside the door.

. Wewalked across the bridge onto the island near the shore.

The book is between the shelf and the desk in the library.

He stood behind the tree by the river near the park,

The children played beneath the tree amidst the flowers around the garden.

They traveled throughout the country between the mountains along the river.

The treasure was hidden beneath the sand beyond the dunes near the shore.

She found the letter inside the envelope along with the photographs.

10. We walked along the path past the pond towards the forest.

Regardlessof Asidefrom Becauseof Regardlessof Exceptfor Owing to

PPNAOVawWNHo

b) Prepositional phrase _
Prepositional phrase is a group of words comprising a preposition, its object, and a modifier of
the object. Ina longer sentence, this ia modifies verbs, nouns, clauses, and phrases.

Examples:

¢ Getting fired from Apple was the best thing that ever happened.
* Your work is going to fill a large part of your life. '
(NE

113

--- PAGE 114 ---
Use of prepositions.
1. Use the following prepositional phrases in meaningful sentences:
to let down, thought of, sided with, screwing up, replaced by, grew up, got fired, trapped in.
2. Rewrite the sentences after replacing the given word with the underline word in the first

sentence.
Example: ‘

¢ My father has always liked football. Interested

« My father has always been interested in football.

1. This passport can be used in many countries. Valid
 ————————————

2. Are you and Ahmad related? Relative
Is ?

3. Paynoattention to what she says. Notice
ee OA ee eee

4. Hewas seventy-six when he died. Age
He ,

5. Acarcrashed into a bus thismorning. Collided
Acar te

6. Wehaverun out of the items you want. Stock.
The items, >

7. My boss seems to enjoy humiliating people. Pleasure
My boss, DS ee

8. If you want to understand Yeat's poetry, youneed to study Irishhistory. Key
Irish history

9. Idon't usually speak to strange men. Habit
| ;

10. All my friends have left me. Deserted

a

a) Write the objective summary of the poem “ Harvest Hymn”
b) Paraphrase this poem line wise.

Teacher's Notes :

* Encourage students to demonstrate attentive listening’ skills while working in a whole class setting and taking
turns to speak with standard pronunciation.

+ Ask them to read with accurate pronunciation, appropriate pitch and voice variation suitable for fictional and

nonfictional texts.
* Help them to analyse organisational patterns in a text:
a. list/ sequence of ideas/ events comparison-contrast b. cause-effect
c. problem-solution d. reasons/ assumptions-conclusion

+ Motivate them to verify the preliminary determination of the meaning of a word or phrase (6.¢., by checking
the inferred meaning in context or in a dictionary).

* Ask them to identify and use compound prepositions and es phrases in writing

* Ask them to use paraphrasing skills to paraphrase a poem

* Help them to use summary skills to write an objective summary of the given text and poems.

114

--- PAGE 115 ---
~ THE KAGHAN WALLEY

Tahir Jahangir

After completing this lesson, you will be able to:

demonstrate attentive listening’ skills while working in a whole class setting and taking turns to speak with
standard pronunciation,
evaluate how authors use language, including figurative language, considering the impact on the reader.
Discuss others’ reading critically, taking account of their views. Express informed opinions, justify the
viewpoint and make recommendations and develop an interest in a variety of texts.
apply skimming and scanning strategies for relevant information and main points in texts to identify the
writer's purpose, and intended audience. Infer the theme/main idea of the text, distinguishing between fact
and opinion where necessary.
summarise complex concepts, processes or information by paraphrasing them using correct language
structure, transitional devices, own words and relevant punctual marks. Make inferences to draw conclusions
from e.g.

a. contextual information

b. writer’s viewpoint

c. implied information -

. interpret and integrate information from a variety of sources for comprehension (e.g., maps, graphs, charts,

diagrams)

acquire and use appropriate words and phrases for reading, writing, speaking, and listening; independently
gather vocabulary when considering a word or phrase important for comprehension or expression.
demonstrate command of the conventions of Standard English capitalization, punctuation, and spelling when
writing in different varieties of texts.

* Observe hyphenation conventions.

* Produce legible work that shows the correct spelling of the conventions of punctuation and

capitalization

write and critique (self/peer checking) the final draft after complete editing and proofreading. Ensure each
paragraph develops the main idea of the essay/piece of writing and the topic sentence of each paragraph. Use
the technique of hook, and lead-in sentences to develop the flow of thought. :

--- PAGE 116 ---
| © Pre-Reading
a) Whatare your feelings while planning a trip to the northern areas? |
b) Which other mountainous areas come to your mind after reading the heading of the unit?

‘

Reading

The Kaghan Valley is less than a
day's drive from Islamabad, the
capital. The favourite route is
through Abbotabad, the
administrative capital of the
valley. It takes an hour from
Abbotabad to Mansehra and the —
road is good. Short of Mansehra
the road splits---the left goes to
Shinkiari valley, and onwards to
Gilgit---the right fork goes
through the city of Mansehra.and then on to Balakot, an hour away. Balakot is the gateway to the
Kaghan valley.

Balakot was the epicentre of the devastating earthquake that struck in 2005. It completely
destroyed the town of Balakot, killing thousands of people and also ccripletely destroying the
road to Kaghan. Massive amounts of national and international aid was arranged to rehabilitate
the affected families and the newly constructed shops and houses are now spread all over the
valley.

Naran is the most popular destination for the tourists, It is located at an altitude of 7000 feet and
is therefore cool in summer. The valley is heavily wooded and the Kunhar river flows through it. A
fishing license can be obtained in.Naran that maybe used throughout the valley. Rods, tackle and
guides can be hired as well. If you are not up to fishing yourself, you can get a fishing guide to do it
for you. He will bring for you the fish he catches by the end of the day. Naran has postal, telephone
and medical facilities also, and is a good base for trips to the higher valleys.

The Kaghan and Naran valleys are blessed with plenty of water.
There is adequate rainfall to feed its forests and ill the streams ( While-reading
and rivers that flow through it. There are a number of lakes in
the valley. One of the prettiest and most accessible is the lake
Saiful Muluk. It is close to the town of Naran and is a must-see
for everyone, who visits that area.

How are the forests fed in
Kaghan and Naran valleys?

On way to Kaghan valley Shogran is the first stop. At over 8000 feet Shogran is cool even in the
middle of summer. The whole ridge is heavily wooded and there are lovely views from the top. The
views are picture perfect, the Kaghan valley stretching into the hazy blue, fold after fold of
mountains interwoven by the Kunhar river. There are high pastures above the hotels .At a distance
of 500-600 feet one gets to the top of the ridge and to open grassy meadow. There are a few giants
of fur trees here at Makra peak, and a stream of sparkling clean water flowing down the mountain.
This is a great camp site. The Makra peak is about 2000 feet above this point and an easy day's
climb.

116

--- PAGE 117 ---
One fine day | decided to attempt it
along with my son and two nephews, all
about ten years of age. It was the end of
April and the peak was covered with
snow. After about thirty minutes climb
we got to a patch of stunted fur trees.
They were like bushes but completely
covered the ground. The trunks of trees
were like thick ropes rolling on the
ground with small branches and leaves
sprouting all over. They covered the
ground so thickly that it was difficult to
walk through these patches. To
photograph the Alpine flowers and
savour the view, we decided to go to the top. | spent sometime taking diceiaiaiinaiia of the Alpine
flowers growing just below the snowing fields.

As tourists go whizzing along the metalled road to Kaghan and Naran, they scarcely sparea glance
at the semi-barrenridgeacross the river to the north-west. Little do they realize that behind the
ridge lies one of the most verdant, lush and charming forests in Pakistan. The forest department
has done a wonderful job of protecting the forests of Sharan and those of adjoining valleys.

Agood metallic road goes across and up and along the ridge on the other side of the river. Terraced
corn fields and flowering bushes lined the road. Farmers had carefully utilized every inch of land
that they possessed. Corn fields were protected by stone walls from passing herds of goats or the
occasional cow, giving a Mediterranean look to the narrow country track. Huge walnut trees
dotted the landscape providing large areas of shade.

The road climbed quickly from 5000 feet by the river to the top of the ridge 9000 feet. The fields
came to an end at the top of the ridge and the forest began. It was sparse to start with but became
dense as we crossed the ridge into the Sharan. valley itself. All signs of habitation had ceased ant
there was nobody on the road, human or animal. The track continued twisting and turning its way
down the ridge and into the valley.

Forty minutes later we got to a clearing in the forest. In the middle of this clearing was a small,
neat looking barrack with a sign saying Youth Hostel. We stopped to investigate. It was a Spartan
but clean dormitory. There were separate rooms for boys and

girls, Beyond the hostel, the path crossed a cluster of wild While-reading
junipers, through a crystal clear stream, and on to ameadow
sloping up to the forest rest house. White, yellow, purple and
pink flowers overwhelmed the lush green of the grass and
created a riot of colour. We had a comfortable night stay at the
rest house.

Where did the path cross a
cluster of wild junipers?

Early next morning we set off towards the distant peak. The walk was a wonderful experience. A
thick forest in full bloom----- banks upon banks of flowers growing to a height of about 4 feet.
Every few hundred yards a stream would cross the path, its water icy cold, as it was melted snow.
Our guide explained that the authoritieshad been so strict in preserving the forest that no one
was allowed to graze their sheep in the forest except for the ten odd families, who were old

residents of that area. Three hours of climbing got us to the top. From there we could see the little

117

--- PAGE 118 ---
white dots of sheep on their ot journey to the high

peaks.

The next day was spent in exploring the walks around the
rest house. One walk is to follow the jeep track leading
behind the rest house up to a natural spring which is the
source of water for the rest house. Beyond the spring is a ,
narrow path leading up to a couple of huts belonging toa *-
local familyabout 800 feet up the ridge. There is awealthof —
wild flowers on the hill side. In fact, Sharan is probably one ~~
of the best places to look for wild flowers. We were told —
that people come here to look for rare plants, for medical ~ '

purposes. ~

Behind the rest house the road forks on to the right, across the stream, and up the right side.
There are magnificent ferns across the path and in the forest. There are good views of the main
Kaghan valley from there. The forest on the way is quite varied with pine trees of different
varieties. Apart from the pines there are walnut and other varieties of deciduous weet, flowers
and small clearings. The whole forest is empty except for birds and butterflies.

The forest is populated with quite a few varieties of birds. Usually at night the owls exchange
voices, deeper in the forest. The beauty of their echoing cries js a novel experience for city-
dwellers.

© Post-reading
Can you name the variety of objects one can see in the northern areas?

Notes and Comments

This travel account has been taken from the book “A Travel Companion to the Northern Areas of
Pakistan” written by Tahir Jahangir. It is an excellent book with sufficient information of the
Northern areas.

Tahir Jahangir got his early education from Aitchison College, Lahore, and graduated in
Economics from the University of Cambridge in 1967. His hobby is travelling and landscape
photography. He has been writing about his travel | experiences in The Friday Times, a weekly
magazine, published from Lahore.

Theme

Travelling is the theme, as clear from the name of the book. This is to familiarize the readers
with the picturesque valley, surrounded by majestic mountains, fascinating terrain with
forests, rivers and glaciers. The account is a guide to travel in that areafor the experienced

people as well as the seasoned travellers.

118

--- PAGE 119 ---
Words

Meaning Synonyms

that can be reached, entered, used etc approachable
plants that grow best on mountains pee ee

group of things of same type appearing together

uous that loses its leaves every year (of a tree, bush,etc.)

accessible

alpine trees

a
8.
a

. devastating causing a lot of damage and destruction

a room for several people to sleep in {especially in a

dormitory school)

epicentre point on earth's surface where effects of earthquake are

plant with large delicate leaves and no flowers

to weave together two or more pieces of thread,
wool,etc.

bush with purple berries used in medicine for flavour
massive very large, heavy

grass covered field used for hay water meadows (neara
river)

connected with Mediterranean sea or countries

mediterranean surrounding it

3
®

overwhelmed | suchstrong emotional effect that is difficult to resist
grass covered land suitable for feeding animals on
a tall forest tree with needle like leaves

help someone to lead a normal, useful life again

pine trees
rehablitate
d

le]

=
®

a high pointed area near the top of a mountain
collection of a lot of different types of the same thing
enjoying to your full

simple, lacking something that makes life easier or
pleasant

as
7

=

savour

spartan

sprouting producing new leaves or buds

not able to grow or develop as much as it should have

fresh and green (of grass, plants, fields, etc.)

119

--- PAGE 120 ---
Comprehension

a) Answer the following questions.
1 Name the gateway to Kaghan.
2 Describe the epicenter of the 2005 earthquake and how devastating it was.
3 Identify the situation of the lake Saiful Muluk.
4 Highlight the difficulties to walk through the patches.
5 Explain the measures that were taken to preserve the forests.
6 Tell reasons of not destroying the wild flowers.
7 Which other trees are grown there besides Pine trees?

8 Apply skimming and scanning strategies for relevant information and main points in texts to
identify the writer's purpose. Infer the theme/ main idea of the text, distinguishing between fact
and opinion where necessary.

b) Encircle the correct option:

i) Elation means:

a) Great happiness b) depressed c) excitement d) honourable
ii) Dotted means:

a) covered by dust ~b) hazy c) bright d) covered by dots
iii) Sparkling means:

a) shining b) blurred c) burning d) dividing
iv) Summit means: .

a) lowest point b) middle point c) highest point d) invisible

Cc) Evaluate how the author used language, including figurative language, considering the impact
on the reader in this blog. Discuss others’ reading critically, taking account of their views. Express
informed opinions, justify the viewpoint and make recommendations and a an interest ina
blogs/articles regarding tourism.

d) Interpret and integrate information from a variety of sources for comprehension (e.g., maps,
graphs, charts, diagrams)

Interpreting and integrating information from a variety of sources for comprehension involves
several key steps. Here's a structured approach to effectively achieve this:
identify and select sources:
a) Diversity: Choose sources from different perspectives, including scholarly articles,
news reports, expert opinions, and primary data.

b) Credibility: Prioritize reliable and reputable sources. Cross-check facts from multiple
sources to ensure accuracy.

c) Summarize key points:

Extract the main ideas from each source. Summarize these points succinctly to capture
the essence of the information provided.

120

ee

--- PAGE 121 ---
d) Compare and contrast:
Look for similarities and differences in the information presented by different sources.
This helps in understanding different viewpoints and identifying any biases or gaps.

e) Synthesize information: .
Combine the summarized points to form a comprehensive understanding of the topic.
This may involve integrating various perspectives into a coherent narrative.
f) Evaluate and critique:
Assess the validity and reliability of the information. Consider the methodology,
evidence, and arguments used in each source. Critically evaluate any potential biases.
g) Drawconclusions:
Based on the integrated information, draw well-supported conclusions. Ensure that
your conclusions are logical and backed by evidence from the sources.
Example: Climate change
1-ldentify and select sources:
e Scholarly article: A peer-reviewed study on the impact of climate change on polar ice
caps.
e Newsreport: Arecent drtiéle on climate policy changes in the European Union.
e Expert opinion: A commentary by a leading climate scientist on renewable energy
solutions.
e Primary data: NASA's data on global temperature changes over the last century.
2-Summarize key points:
¢ Scholarly article: Polar ice caps are melting at an accelerated rate due to rising global
temperatures, leading to sea-level rise.
*¢ News report: The EU has introduced stricter emissions regulations to combat climate
change, aiming for carbon neutrality by 2050.
* Expert opinion: Renewable energy adoption is crucial for reducing greenhouse gas
emissions, with solar and wind power being the most viable options.
¢ Primary data: NASA's data shows a steady increase in global temperatures, with the last
decade being the hottest on record.

3-Compare and contrast:

e Both the scholarly article and NASA data highlight the ongoing increase in global
temperatures and its impacts.

* Thenews report and expert opinion focus on policy and solutions, emphasizing the need
for immediate action and renewable energy.

4-Synthesize information:

¢ The rising global temperatures, as confirmed by NASA data and scholarly research,

necessitate urgent policy measures like those adopted by the EU.

* Renewable energy, advocated by the expert, is a key component of effective climate
policy, supporting the EU's regulatory approach.

121

--- PAGE 122 ---
Evaluate and critique:

# Thescholarly article is highly reliable due to its peer-reviewed nature. The news report
provides current context but should be checked against other reports for confirmation.

¢ The expert opinion adds practical insights into renewable energy solutions, though it |
may carry some bias towards certain technologies.

Draw conclusions:

Climate change is a pressing issue confirmed by multiple sources. Effective mitigation requires

‘a combination of strict emissions regulations and the adoption of renewable energy
technologies. Policymakers must act on scientific evidence and integrate diverse strategies to
address the multifaceted challenges of climate change.

Maps, Graphs, Charts, Diagrams on Climatic Changes

Injuries, fatalities
mental health impacts

Heat-related illness
and death,
ardiovascular failure

Forced migration,
civil conflict,

Malnutrition
diarrheal disease

Asthma,
cardiovascular disease

Air.
pollution » Malaria, dengue,
: ~ X\encephalitis, hantavirus,
\__ rift valley fever,
lyme disease,
\ chikungunya,
'\ West Nile virus

Respiratory
/ allergies, asthma

cryptosporidiosis,

campylobacter, leptospirosis,

harmful algal blooms

--- PAGE 123 ---
;
ne

" Yiekt: Bushels per Acre
eo8ssee88 8 #8

eeo wro veeo 80 m0 210 - ¢ end asthma

Demonstrate attentive listening’ skills while working in a whole class setting and taking
turns to speak with standard pronunciation.

e While making travel plans we need to focus on the following points.
a) location  b)time c) distance d) duration
. Now you can ask questions from your class mates like:
a) Where are you going to stay and for how long?
b) Would you like to take photographs?
e Describe your fe alings after reading the unit.
* Thelisteners shuuld ask different questions like:
a) What inspired you most over there? .
b) Do you want to travel to any other place in the country?
Cc) Has the travelling experience added to your previous knowledge?
* Change views about travelling with other groups in the class to know more about travelling.

* Students can take turns to speak with standard pronunciation about the role of Tourism
Department in our country.

Inference
1. Canyou imagine travelling by sea as people used to travel in the past?
2. Doyou think travelling is an interesting experience?

Vocabulary and Grammar

a) Appropriate words and phrases for reading, writing, speaking, and listening; independently
gather vocabulary when considering a word or phrase important for comprehension or
expression. ;

Enhancing vocabulary involves actively identifying, understanding, practicing, and using new
words and phrases across various contexts. Here's a brief discussion on this concept:

LL ee

123

--- PAGE 124 ---
Key steps to enhance vocabulary:
1-Identify key Words and phrases:

e Reading and listening: While engaging with different texts and — sources, take note
of unfamiliar or significant words. Context clues can often help deduce meanings.

2-Understand meanings:

¢ Dictionaries: Look up definitions, synonyms, antonyms, and usage examples to fully
grasp the meaning of new words.

* Contextual examples: Observe how the words are used in sentences to understand
their connotations and appropriate contexts.

3-Practice usage:

© Writing: Incorporate new vocabulary into your writing re essays, stories, or
journals. Practice using new words in sentences.

¢ Speaking: Use new words in conversations and discussions to reinforce your learning
and improve recall.

4-Review and reinforce:

¢ Regular review: Use flashcards, vocabulary apps, or spaced repetition systems (SRS) to
review new vocabulary regularly. _

® Repetition: Repeated exposure and use of new words in different contexts help solidify
your understanding and retention.
5-Engage in active learning:
¢ Diverse reading materials: Read books, articles, and journals across various genres and
topics to encounter a wide range of vocabulary.
e Listening to varied sources: Listen to podcasts, lectures, and conversations to hear
new vocabulary in use.
© Discussion and practice: Join discussion groups or language exchange programs to
practice and reinforce new vocabulary in real-life conversations.
Example:
e¢ Word: Ameliorate
Meaning: To make something bad or unsatisfactory better.
Contextual use: “The new policies are designed to ameliorate the effects of pollution.”
_ Practice sentence: "Efforts to ameliorate the situation were successful.”
By systematically identifying and practicing new vocabulary, you can improve your language skills

and enhance your ability to communicate effectively in reading, writing, speaking, and listening.
Regular engagement with diverse sources and active usage of new words ensures continual

growth in your vocabulary.

Activity : Read the following passage:
“In the midst of the bustling city, there was a serene park that offered a respite from the
cacophony of urban life. The park was adorned with vibrant flowers and lush greenery,
creating an oasis of tranquility. Visitors often found solace in the gentle rustle of leaves and
the melodious chirping of birds.”

.

124

--- PAGE 125 ---
a) Identify and list five unfamiliar or significant words from the passage:
Woe 15. Word 2: Word 3:

Word 4: seamen Word 5:

b) Look up the meanings of the words listed above and write them down:
Word 1:______s-:~ Definition:

Word 2:____ = ~ Definition:

Word 3:_______s- Definition:

Word 4:___________- Definition:

Word 5:___ Ss Definition:

c) Use each word in a sentence:

Word 1: :

Word 2: ;

Word 3:

Word 4:

Word 5:
Demonstrate command of the conventions of Standard English capitalization, punctuation,
and spelling when writing in different varieties of texts.

Activity: Write a short paragraph or essay using at least three of the new words you have
learned on a memorable experience in nature following command of the conventions of

Standard English capitalization, punctuation, and nhecscept when et in different varieties
of texts.

¢ Observe hyphenation conventions

Fundamentally, the hyphen is a joiner. It can join sivvacal different types of things: two nouns to
make one complete word (house-plant) an adjective and a noun to make a compound word
(accident-prone) two words that, when linked, describe a noun (agreed-upon sum, two-

dimensional object

Activity: Rewrite the following sentences with correct hyphenation:
a. The editor in chief will review the article.
b. They bought a three bedroom house.
c. This is a user friendly website.
d. We need a long term solution.
e. She is a highly respected scientist.

_ f.She bought a well furnished apartment.

g. The meeting will be held on twenty eight.

h. He is a co founder of the company.

i. The recipe calls for a two third cup of sugar.

j. The twenty four year old athlete won the race.

125

--- PAGE 126 ---
‘ies Task: Write and critique (self/peer checking) the final draft after complete editing and

'. proofreading.on “Impact of Tourism in a Country's Development”. Ensure each paragraph
.develops the main idea of the essay/piece of writing and the topic sentence of each
paragraph. Use the technique of hook, and lead-in sentences to develop the flow-of
thought.

Understanding the Writing Process

Look’at the process in a book that the writer uses. What you see in print might not be much like
the first plan for the book. The author might have rewritten many times.

The writing process is often divided into five stages. Most writers go back and forth through these
_ Stages. There is no one correct way to write.

Teacher's Note:

* Ask students to demonstrate attentive listening’ skills while working in a whole class setting and
taking turns to speak with standard pronunciation.
Discuss with them to evaluate how authors use language, including figurative language,
considering the impact on the reader. Discuss others’ reading critically, taking account of their
views. Express informed opinions, justify the viewpoint and make recommendations and develop
an interest in a variety of texts. ,
Help them to apply skimming and scanning strategies for relevant information and main points in
texts to identify the writer's purpose, and intended audience. Infer the theme/main idea of the

. text, distinguishing between fact and opinion where necessary.

Encourage them to interpret and integrate information from a variety of sources for
comprehension (e.g., maps, graphs, charts, diagrams)
Let them acquire and use appropriate words and phrases for reading, writing, speaking, and
listening; independently gather vocabulary when considering a word or phrase important for
comprehension or expression.
Motivate them to demonstrate command of the conventions of Standard English capitalization,
punctuation, and spelling when writing in different varieties of texts.
Ask them to write and critique (self/peer checking) the final draft after complete editing and
proofreading. Let them ensure each paragraph develops the main idea of the essay/piece of
writing and the topic sentence of each paragraph and to use the teeta of hook, and lead-in
sentences to develop the flow of thought.

: 126

--- PAGE 127 ---
AFTER TWENTY YEARS

O' Henry (1862-1910)

After completing this lesson, you will be able to:

speak confidently and fluently in a wide range of contexts, For example, (conflict resolution, panel
discussion, role-play, dialogue) etc.) to fulfil different purposes (exposition, argumentation etc.).

evaluate the particular elements of a story or drama (e.g., how the setting shapes the characters or
plot). Evaluate stages of plot development in a fictional text.(exposition, setting, climax, character
development, resolution)Examine how complex characters (e.g., those with multiple or conflicting
motivations) develop over the course of a text, interact with other characters, and advance the plot
or develop the theme. ;

cite strong and thorough textual evidence to support analysis of what the text says explicitly as well
as inferences drawn from the text.

examine and interpret the use of conjunctions and transitional devices in speech and writing to
create the effect. Recognize and use subordinating conjunctions to connect independent clause/s
to dependent clause/s.e.g., He could not attend the meeting because he was sick.

recognize and use correlative conjunctions including pairs such as “both/and,” “either/or,”
neither/nor,” “not/but" and “not only/but also.” etc.

write a descriptive composition (giving physical description and characteristics/traits of a
person/object/place moving from general to specific), using correct punctuation and spelling, by
using the process approach - brainstorming, mind mapping, and writing a first draft.

apply knowledge of parts of speech, tenses, sentence structure and other features of grammar and
vocabulary to understand how language functions in different contexts, make effective choices for
meaning or style while reading, listening and writing.

--- PAGE 128 ---
(<0) Pre-Reading
a) Doyoubelieve in fulfilling promises?
b) Are you excited to read an unprecedented example?

a a i

The policeman on the beat moved up the avenue impressively. The
impressiveness was habitual and not for show, for spectators were few.
The time was barely 10 O'clock at night, but chilly gusts of wind with a
taste of rain in them had well deployed the streets.
Trying doors as he went, twirling his club with many intricate and artful
movements, turning now and then to cast his watchful eye down the
pacific thoroughfare, the officer with his stalwart form and slight
swagger, made a fine picture of a guardian of the peace.
The vicinity was one that kept early hours. Now and
then you might see the lights of a cigar store or of an all-
night lunch counter; but the majority of the doors
belonged to business places that had long since been
closed.

When about midway of a certain block the policeman suddenly slowed his walk. In the doorway of
a darkened hardware store a man leaned, with the unlighted cigar in his mouth. As the policeman
walked up to him the man spoke quickly.

“it's alright, officer, “he said, reassuringly. “I'm just waiting for a friend, It's an appointment
made twenty years ago. Sounds a little funny to you, doesn't it? Well, I'll explain if you would

like to make certain it's all straight. About that long ago there used to be a restaurant where this
store sands "Big Joe Bardy's” restaurant. “Until five years ago”, said the policeman. “It was
torn down then.” The man in the doorway struck a match and lit his cigar. The light sowed a pale,
square-jawed face with keen eyes, and a little white scar near his right eyebrow. His scarf pin was
a large diamond set.

“Twenty years ago tonight,” said the man. “I dined here at “Big Joe Bardy’s” with Jimmy Wells, my
best chum, and the finest chap in the world. He and | were raised here in New York, just like two
brothers, together. | was eighteen and Jimmy was twenty. The next morning | was to start for the
West to make my fortune. You couldn't have dragged Jimmy out of New York. He thought that it
was the only place on earth. Well, we agreed that night that we would meet here again exactly
after twenty years from that date and time, no matter what our conditions might be or from what
distance we might have to come. We figured out that in twenty ears each of us ought to have our
destiny worked out and our fortunes made, wha‘ever they were
going to be.”

“It sounds pretty interesting”, said the policeman. “Rather a
long time between meets, though, it seems to me. Haven't you
heard from your friend since you left”?

While-reading

What was the policeman doing while
strolling on the thoroughfare?

While-reading
Why did the friends depart
twenty years back?

128 -

--- PAGE 129 ---
Unit 13: After Twenty Years

“Well, yes, for a time we corresponded”, said the other. “But after a year or two we lost track of
each other. You see, the West is pretty big proposition, and kept hustling around over it pretty
lively. But | know Jimmy will meet me here if he is alive, for he always was the truest, staunchest
(id chap in the world. He'll never forget. | came a thousand miles to stand in this door tonight and
it's worth it if my old partner turns up.”

The waiting man pulled out a handsome watch, the lid of it set with small diamonds. “Three
minutes to ten,” he announced. “It was exactly ten O'clock when we parted here at the
restaurant door.

“Did pretty well out West, didn't you?” Asked the policeman.

“You bet! | hope Jimmy has done half as well. He was a kind of plodder, though, good fellow as he
was. I've had to compete with some of the sharpest wits going to get my pile. A man gets in a
groove in New York. It takes West to put a razor edge on him.”

The policeman twirled his club and took a step or two.
“I'll be on my way. Hope your friend comes around alright. Going to call time on him sharp?”

* “I should say not!” said the other. I'll give him half an hour at least. If jimmy is alive on earth, he'll
be here by that time. So long, officer.”
“Good night, sir,” said the policeman, passing on along his beat, trying doors as he went.
There was now a fine, cold drizzle falling, and the wind had risen from its uncertain puffs into a
steady blow. The few foot passengers astir in this quarter hurried dismally and silently along with
coat collars turned high and pocketed hands. And in the door of the hardware store the man who
had come a thousand miles to fill an appointment, uncertain almost to absurdity, with the friend
of his youth, smoked his cigar and waited. About twenty minutes he wz iced, and then a tall man in
a long overcoat, with collars turned up to his ears, hurried across ‘.om the opposite side of the
street. He went directly to the waiting room.
“Is that you Bob?” he asked, doubtfully.
“Is that you Jimmy Wells?” cried the man in the door.
“Bless my heart!” explained the new arrival, grasping both the other's hands with his own.
“It's Bob, sure as fate. | was certain I'd find you here if you were still in existence.
Well, well, well__twenty years are a long time. The old restaurant is gone, Bob; | wish it had
lasted, so we could have had another dinner there. How has the West treated you, old man?”
“Bully; it has given me everything | had asked for. You've changed lots, Jimmy. | never thought you
were so tall by two or three inches.
“Oh, | grew a bit after | was twenty.”
“Doing well in New York, Jimmy?”

While-reading

How much interest does the meeting
of the two friends create?

“Moderately, | have a position in one of the city departments. Come on Bob; we'll go around toa
place | know of, and have a good long talk about old times.”
The two men started up the street, arm in arm. The man from the West, his egotism enlarged by

success, was beginning to outline the history of his career. The other, submerged in his overcoat,
listened with interest.

129

--- PAGE 130 ---
At the corner stood a drug
store, brilliant with electric
lights. When they came into
this glare each of them
turned simultaneously to
gaze upon the other's face.

The man from the West
stopped suddenly and
released his arm.

“You are not Jimmy Wells”
he snapped. “Twenty years
is a long time, but not long
enough to change a man's
nose from a Roman to a
pug.”

“It sometimes changes a good man into a bad one,” said the tall man.

“You've been under arrest for twenty minutes, “Silky” Bob. Chicago thinks you may have dropped
over .our way and wires us she wants to have a chat with you. Going quietly are you? That's
sensible. Now, before we go to the station here's a note | was asked to hand you. You may read it
here at the window. It's from Patrolman Wells”.

The man from the West unfolded the little piece of paper handed him. His hand was steady when
he began to read, but it trembled a little by the time he had finished. The note was rather short.

Bob: / was at the appointed place on time. When you struck the match to light your cigar I saw it
was the face of the man wanted in Chicago. Somehow | couldn't do it myself, so! went around and
got a plain clothes man to do the job Jimmy.

© Post-reading

How does the writer prepare for the end of the story?

Notes and Comments

O'Henry (1862-1910) is the pen name of William Sydney Porter. As a champion of the
ordinary city people, he evoked their tragedies and aspirations with humour and
artistry. The arresting opening, and twist of the plot in the end, characteristically mark
his stories. In fact, he perfected the art of surprise ending. O'Henry published over
three hundred stories from 1899-1909, and gained worldwide acclaim.

Theme —
Honesty towards duty, truthfulness, caring for law and sincere friendship is the

theme. The man did not let his friendship and love come in his way to fulfill his duty
and responsibility.

130

--- PAGE 131 ---
Words Meanings Synonyms

;
Javenue __|astreetinatownorcity
‘bully __| one whouses strength or power tohurt or frighten others
Cae 0" ae Re ree
‘club _| heavyironstickwithathickerendusedasaweapon __|
[dismally ©». | miserably, inagloomystate
‘ enteen Cf) vanity, too much pride in yourself

Peer to think and decide

‘groove

gusts wind

sudden strong increase in the spee
hustling making somebody move quickly by pushing aggressivel
intricate having different parts and small details to fit together

.

moderatel fairly but not very reasonably; to an average exter.
a person who works slowly, steadily but withcut maginatio

an idea or a plan of action as suggested
an act of breathing in something like a cigarette or cigar
a small dog with short hair and a wide flat face
making feel less worried or uncertain about something

L OU
reassuringl

simultaneous|

mark left on the skin after a wound

at the same time P

spectators

people who ae watching an event

lo

to walk in an extremely proud and confident wa
to move or dance round and round

swagger
twirled

--- PAGE 132 ---
a) Answer the following questions.

Describe the scene in the beginning of the story.

Was the place a business centre only?

Explain the reason of the street's emptiness at that time.

What kind of characters does the story “After Twenty Years” have?

Analyze the most significant happening in the story.

Describe the climax of the story “After Twenty Years”.

Give an account of Jimmy and Bob's personalities in the story.

The ending of “After Twenty Years” fills the reader with poignancy. Discuss.

In the second line the word ‘spectator’ is used. In what context the author has used the word
in the story?

10 Evaluate stages of plot development in the story heading wise : exposition, setting, climax,
character development, resolution

11 Examine how complex characters in the story (e.g., those with multiple or conflicting
motivations) develop over the course of the text, interact with other characters, and
advance the plot or develop the theme of the story.

12 Cite strong and thorough textual evidence to support analysis of what the story tells
explicitly as well as inferences drawn from the text.

omonourhwn =

b) Read the following statements and encircle the most appropriate option:
i) Policeman walks an isolated beat at night.
a) He will meet someone.
b) He may arrest someone.
c) He may help someone in need.
ii) The man in the doorway struck a match and lit his cigar.
a) He wanted to reveal a secret.
b) He wanted to show his diamond fitted scarf pin.
c) He wanted to see the other person in that dim light.
iii)“Haven't you heard from your friend ever since you left’?
a) The man waiting was trying to gain time by asking questions.
b) He wanted to be sure that he has found the man he was looking for.
c) The man waiting wanted to show his diamond studded wrist watch.
iv) Bob calls Jimmy a plodder.
a) Does he mean Bob is conceited?
b) Does he think Bob is forgetful?
c) Does he think Bob works slowly?

13?

--- PAGE 133 ---
c) Onachart like this, analyze the last four paragraphs of “After Twenty Years”.
What Happens What is Surprising
e Man lets go off his friend's arms. It seems that something has gone wrong.

e When they came into this glare. Each of them turned simultaneously to gaze the
other's face.

e About twenty minutes he waited. Then a tall man in an over coat turned up to his
ears, hurried across from the opposite side of the street.

d) Breaking down sentences:
i) What are the two subjects of this sentence? How do you know?

* The time was barely 10 O'clock at night, but chilly gusts of wind with a taste of rain in
them had well-nigh deported the streets.

ii) Which part of the following sentence tells what the man is doing?

e And in the door of the hardware store the man who had come a thousand miles to fill an
appointment, uncertain to almost absurdity, with the friend of his youth, smoked his
cigar, and waited.

iii) Restate the main action of this statement in your own words:

The man from the West, his egotism enlarged by success, was beginning to outline the history of
his career

speak confidently and fluently in a wide range of contexts

e Arrange the class in groups. Tell each group to comment on the arrest of ‘Silky Bob’. Each
group leader should loudly relate it to the other groups.

¢ The words should be spoken clearly, carefully and with correct pronunciation.
¢ The voice should be raised and lowered for dramatic effect.

e It should be spoken slowly enough for the audience to understand, but not so slowly that
they get bored.

* Make a three column chart. Use one column for jimmy’'s words and expressions. Use the
other column for Bob's. Write the review of their conversation in the third column.

Inference
1 Name three skills that a policeman must have.
2 Isn't it a great satisfaction to perform your duty with honesty?

133

--- PAGE 134 ---
Transitions
For the beginning
First As a rule Accordingly In the first place
As well as Nearly Here Opposite
Likewise Early on Before At the beginning
The first To begin At first An important
Yet . Beyond Moreover Generally
Besides To start To begin One important
For the middle
Therefore That is In short At the same time
Particularly Including Thatis — Correspondingly
Otherwise However Furthermore Except
Moreover In addition Secondly Suddenly
Along with After Later In fact
For the end
In brief Obviously The final The last
The worst Ultimately To sum up To conclude
Then Lastly Finally To summarize
Clearly Last of all: Undoubtedly On the whole
In fact Thus ; Since Hence

Transitions Words for Essays

Of course For example
Clearly Such as
Alternatively Evidently For instance

Despite this Surely Such as
On the contrary Indeed In other words

Yet Undoubtedly An instance

However
Nevertheless

Decidedly As revealed by
To show that
In the case of
Besides As an example
For one thing

Whereas
Apart from Certainly
Even so For this reason
Although
In spite of Again
While

134

--- PAGE 135 ---
Because Of course

Since Clearly Also
For Evidently In addition
So Surely Further
Consequently Indeed Furthermore
Therefore Undoubtedly Besides
Thus Decidedly In addition to

Hence Certainly. Moreover
Owing to For this reason Additionally
As a result of Besides Not only ... but also
Causes Again Then
As a consequence of Again
Leads to Finally
Contributes of

a) Examine and interpret the use of conjunctions and transitional devices in speech

Conjunctions and transitional devices are the unsung heroes of clear and impactful
communication. They act like bridges, smoothly connecting ideas and guiding your audience
through your message. Let's delve into how they create specific effects in both speech and
writing:

Conjunctions:

¢ Coordinating conjunctions (FANBOYS): These workhorses (For, And, Nor, But, Or, Yet, So).
They show simple relationships like sequence ("She woke up, and then made coffee") or
contrast ("I wanted coffee, but there weren't any beans”).

¢ Subordinating conjunctions: These introduce dependent clauses, which rely on an
independent clause for complete meaning. They signal a variety of connections between
ideas:

* Time: "When the storm hit, the power went out.” (When shows the timing)

* Reason: “He exercised regularly because he wanted to stay healthy.” (Because
shows cause and effect)

+ Condition: “If you practice, you'll improve." (If shows a hypothetical situation)
Transitional devices:

Transitional devices go beyond basic conjunctions, offering a broader toolkit to show the flow of
ideas. They come in various categories:

* Sequencing: First, next, then, finally (show order)

¢ Cause and effect: Because, therefore, hence (show cause or result)

* Contrast: However, conversely, on the other hand (show opposing ideas)
¢ Similarity: Likewise, similarly, inthe same way (show connections)

¢ Emphasis: In fact, inrueed, moreover (add weight to a point)

135

--- PAGE 136 ---
¢ Example: For instance, for example, specifically (introduce illustrative examples)
Effects created:

¢ Clarity and flow: By using conjunctions and transitions effectively, you guide your
audience through your message, making it clear and well-organized. They act like
signposts, indicating how ideas relate to each other.

¢ Relationships: These tools signal the connections between your points. Did you add new
information? Contrast an idea? Show a cause and effect? Choosing the right transition helps
your audience understand how these ideas fit together.

e Emphasis and tone: Transitions can add emphasis or create a specific tone. For example,
"Frankly" sets a more direct tone than "In conclusion.”

The takeaway:
Effective use of conjunctions and transitions takes practice. Here are some tips:
e Read actively: Pay attention to how these elements are used in your reading to understand
their impact.
e¢ Experiment: Try incorporating different transitions into your writing and speech to see
how they affect the flow and impact.

e Listen closely: Notice how effective speakers use transitional phrases to connect their
ideas during presentations or speeches.

Activity: Write a short paragraph (5-7 sentences) about a recent experience. Use a
variety of conjunctions and transitional devices to create a clear and well-organized

message. Be sure to identify the type of conjunction or transitional device you used for
each instance (e.g., for contrast - however).

b) Use subordinating conjunctions to connect independent clause/s to dependent clause

Subordinating Conjunctions

Subordinating conjunctions are words that connect two clauses in a sentence, making one
clause dependent on the other. It shows the relationship between the clauses, such as time,
cause and effect, contrast, or condition.

Couse and Fact Time Condition

whereas "
while

in contrast
although

since
so that
in order that

* 2
Bes

Purpose Comparison

so that just as although

wherever
* everywhere
anywhere

than even though
rather than though
as if whereas

in order that
lest
in order to

136

--- PAGE 137 ---
Clauses and Conjunctions
Independent Clauses

Can stand alone as a sentence and can
express a complete thought.

Think of these as on adult

We are going to label our independent
clauses with a capital I.

Coordinating Conjunctions
(FANBOYS)

These appear between two independent
clauses, Sometimes.a semicolon : may
appear instead of a FANBOY

We are going to box and cross these

Dependent Clauses

Can Not stand alone as a sentence and
DOES NOT express a complete thought.

Think of these as on baby

We are going to label our dependent
clauses with a capital D.

Subordinating Conjunctions
(A WHITE BUS)

These usually appear at the beginning of a
dependent clause

A- after, although, as
W - when, while, where
H - how

| - if

T - than, then

E - even though

B - because, before
U - until, unless

S - since

We are going to squiggly line these

Some examples of how subordinating conjunctions can be used to connect independent and

dependent clauses:

Time:

¢ Independent clause: The party started.

* Dependent clause: After the guests arrived. (This clause tells us when the party

started)

¢ Complete sentence: The party started after the guests arrived.

¢ Independent clause: | went to bed early.

¢ Dependent clause: Because | was feeling tired. (This clause tells us why | went to bed

early)

¢ Complete sentence: | went to bed early because | was feeling tired.

Condition:

* Independent clause: We can go to the beach.

Gir

--- PAGE 138 ---
e Dependent clause: If the weather is nice. (This clause tells us under what condition we
can go to the beach)

¢ Complete sentence: We can go to the beach if the weather is nice.
Other examples:
: e Contrast: She wanted coffee, while he preferred tea. (Connects contrasting preferences)

© Place: We found a hidden cave, where there were ancient paintings. (Connects the
location of the cave)

e Concession: Although it was raining, we decided to go for a walk. (Connects despite a
challenge)

Activity: Match the independent clause in Column A with the dependent clause in Column
B that best creates a complete and grammatically correct sentence using a subordinating
conjunction. Write the letter of the matching dependent clause on the line next to the
independent clause.

Column A (Independent clauses)
1. The baker decorated the cake
2. We went to the park ___ st.
3. | finished my homework ___ .
4. If you practice your instrument,
5. Because the weather was nice,
Column B (Dependent Clauses)

a. when the sun was shining. b. so she could add the finishing touches. c. as long as it
wasn't raining. d. you will improve your skills. e. after | finished eating dinner.

c) Use of correlative conjunctions including pairs such as “both/and,” “either/or,” either/nor,”
“not/but" and “not only/but also

Activity: Write three sentences using different correlative conjunctions. Remember to
maintain balance and clarity in your use.

138

--- PAGE 139 ---
Correlative Conjunctions —

Correlative conjunctions are pairs of words that work together to connect word, phrases, or
clauses in a sentence. They join similar grammatical elements (such as nouns, verbs, adjectives,
or adverbs) to create a balanced and parallel structure in a sentence.

Pairs Functions Examples

Both...and Used to join two similar elements, inclusion. | She is both intelligent and hardworking.

Either. ..or Presents a choice between two alternatives. | Neither the car nor the bicycle is working.
Used to connect two negative alternatives. She speaks French as fluently as Spanish.
U

No sooner...than He works so hard that he deserves a break
Hardly...when “1 indicates a near-simultaneous occurrence, | He is just as excited as | am about the trip.

She is so tired that she falls asleep instantly.
Just as...so | can visit you either on Saturday or Sunday.

It is Used to express a conditional relationship} _|'ll finish my work either today or tomorrow.

Emphasizes a contrast between two elements} You can have either pizza or pasta for dinner.
It introduces an either-or situation or a choice.| He is such a kind person as everyone admires.
Itis used to show the presence of two qualities.} He is not only my friend but also my colleague.

Correlative conjunctions add a special touch to your writing and speech, creating balance and
emphasis. Let's explore some common pairs and how to use them effectively:

1. Both/And: This pair emphasizes the equal importance of two things.
e« Example: The restaurant offered both delicious food and excellent service. (Highlights
two positive aspects) | , ‘
2. Either/Or: This pair introduces.a choice between two options. ~
* Example: You can either pay now or later. (Clearly preserits two possibilities)
3. Neither/Nor: This pair negates both options in a choice. ©

° Example: She neither likes to. swim nor does she like to sunbathe. (Shows dislike for
both activities) '

4, Not/But: This pair introduces a contrast between two ideas.
e Example: The movie wasn't scary, but it was suspenseful. (Highlights opposing
qualities)
5. Not Only/But Also: This pair emphasizes not just one thing but also another.
* Example: The trip was not only educational, but also very enjoyable. (Highlights two
benefits) pe ae, a ;

Not only...but also

139

--- PAGE 140 ---
Writing , :
Descriptive composition

Descriptive essay outline
1. Introduction
e Ahook to grab the reader’s attention
e Brief explanation of the topic or subject
e Thesis statement that previews the main points to be described
2. Body paragraph
* Topic sentence that introduces the aspect to be described
* Detailed description of the aspect, including, sensory detail (sight, sound, smell, taste,
touch)
e Explanation of the significance & importance of this aspect to the overall subject
3. Conclusion
* Restate the thesis and summarize the main points of the essay
e Leave the reader with a final impression or thought

A descriptive composition, also known as a descriptive essay, is a type of writing that focuses on
using vivid language to create a mental picture for the reader. It goes beyond simply stating facts
or opinions, instead aiming to immerse the reader in a specific experience, person, place, or
object.

Here are some key features of a descriptive composition:

e Sensory details: The writer employs vivid descriptions that appeal to all five senses (sight,
smell, touch, taste, and hearing). This helps the reader feel like they are actually
experiencing what is being described.

¢ Figurative language: Techniques like similes, metaphors, and personification are often
used to add depth and creativity to the descriptions.

* Organization: Descriptive compositions are typically well-organized, with a clear focus
and a logical flow of ideas. The writer might use spatial organization (describing something
from a specific vantage point), chronological order (describing events in sequence), or
another structure to guide the reader's imagination.

¢ Emotional impact: The goal is not just to describe something objectively, but to evoke an
emotional response in the reader. The writer may use descriptive language to create a
sense of wonder, awe, fear, excitement, or any other emotion that aligns with the subject
matter.

Task: Write a descriptive composition (giving physical description and characteristics/traits of a
person/object/place moving from general to specific) on “sincere friendship” using correct

punctuation and spelling, by using the process approach - brainstorming, mind mapping, and
writing a first draft.

Task: Write a descriptive composition (giving physical description and characteristics/traits _
of a person/object/place moving from general to specific) on “sincere friendship” using
correct punctuation and spelling, by using the process approach - brainstorming, mind
mapping, and writing a first draft. It also needs to apply knowledge of parts of speech,
tenses, sentence structure and other features of grammar and vocabulary to understand —
how language functions in different contexts, make effective choices for meaning or style —

140

--- PAGE 141 ---
The Solitary Reaper

William Wordsworth (1770 - 1850)

After completing this lesson, you will be able to: .

® use pre-reading and while-reading strategies to analyze and explore different layers of meaning
within texts
demonstrate attentive listening skills while working in the whole class setting and taking turns to
speak with standard pronunciation
listen to texts and critically analyze the situations/events
evaluate two or more central ideas of a text and analyze their development over the course of the
text, including how they interact and build on one another to provide a complex analysis.

Use summary skills to
1. extract salient points and develop a mind map to summarize a variety of
informational texts.
2. transfer the written text to a table, diagram, flowchart or work plan.

cite strong and thorough textual evidence to support analysis of what the text says explicitly as
well as inferences drawn from the text
demonstrate understanding of figurative language, word relationships, and nuances in word
meanings. ‘
produce clear and coherent writing in which the development, organization, and style are
appropriate to the task, purpose and audience
use paraphrasing skills to paraphrase a poem
provide a concluding statement or section that follows from and support the argument
presented
write formal letters and emails to people in extended academic (professional) environments for

various purposes

--- PAGE 142 ---
Bin ee oe

- antigs >. oi
© Pre-Reading
a) Canyou think of any other poem of Wordsworth in comparison to this poem? Discuss.

b) Is it true that Wordsworth's poetry brings appreciation of nature to the mind of the
‘ reader? Describe.

Behold her, single in the field,
Yon solitary Highland Lass!
—— Reaping and singing by herself;
Stop here, or gently pass!
Alone cuts and binds the grain,
’ And sings a melancholy strain;
hy: O listen! for the Vale profound While-reading
«wa Is overflowing with the sound.

Who is the woman in the poem and
what is she doing?

No Nightingale did ever chaunt
More welcome notes to weary bands
Of travellers in some shady haunt,
Among Arabian sands:

A voice so thrilling ne'er was heard
In spring-time from the Cuckoo-bird,
Breaking the silence of the seas
Among the farthest Hebrides.

Will no one tell me what she sings?—
Perhaps the plaintive numbers flow
For old, unhappy, far-off things,

And battles long ago:

Or is it some more humble lay,
Familiar matter of to-day?

Some natural sorrow, loss, or pain,
That has been, and may be again?

While-reading

Does the poet understand the reaper’s
song in ‘The Solitary Reaper”?

Whate'er the theme, the Maiden sang
As if her song could have no ending;

| saw her singing at her work,

And o'er the sickle bendingj—

| listened, motionless and still;
And, as | mounted up the hill,

The music in my heart | bore,

Long after it was heard no more. ae ' William Wordsworth

© Post-reading
Do you think the music of the song has given infinite consolation to the poet?

--- PAGE 143 ---
Notes and Comments
William Wordsworth (1770-1850) was born in the lake District of Northern England. Wordsworth
was one of the leading figures of English Romanticism, an artistic and intellectual movement
that swept across Europe at the end of the 18" century. The classical poets did not have much
Tespect for nature and the common man, but Wordsworth took up new subjects of poetry. His
adoration of nature and common simple life were things of Romantic character.
His poetry is for common people, reading it, people feel that it is happening to us too, and can
relate it to their own lives.
The year 1793 saw the first publication of poems by Wordsworth, in the collections An Evening
Walk and Descriptive Sketches.
Together Wordsworth and Coleridge produced Lyrical Ballads (1798), an important work in the
English Romantic Movement.
Most famous poems, “Tintern Abbey”, published in this collection, along with Coleridge's “The
Rime of the Ancient Mariner”.
William Wordsworth was the central figure in the English Romantic revolution. His contribution
to it was that he formulated in his poems and essays a new attitude towards nature. This was
more than a matter of introducing nature imagery into his verse. Secondly, Wordsworth placed
poetry at the centre of human experience. In impassioned rhetoric he pronounced poetry to be
nothing less than “the first and last of all knowledge---it is as immortal as the heart of man”.
Then he went on to create some of the greatest English poetry of his century.
He died of Pleurisy on April 23", 1850 at the age of 88 in United Kingdom.

Http: //www.britannica.com

Themes

Themes of the poem The Solitary Reaper” by William Wordsworth revolve around the power of
nature, the beauty of simplicity, and the significance of solitary experiences.

Isolation and solitude: The poem highlight the solitary existence of the reaper in the field,
emphasizing. her separation from society. This solitude can be seen as both a source of
tranquility and a cause for loneliness.

Connection to Nature: The reaper’s song, which is an unknown language to the speaker, is a
direct expression of her connection to nature. The poem suggests that nature has a profound
and universal language that transcends cultural and linguistic barriers.

Transient Moments of Beauty: Wordsworth captures a fleeting moment of beauty in nature,
emphasizing the transient nature of human existence. The beauty of the reaper’s song is
compared to that of a nightingale or a cuckoo, evoking a sense of wonder and admiration.

The Power of Memory: The speaker reflects on the experience long after it has passed,
suggesting the enduring power of memory to evoke emotions and sensations. The memory of
the reaper’s song continues to resonate with the speaker, demonstrating the lasting impact of
solitary moments in nature.

Overall: “The Solitary Reaper” celebrates the simplicity and beauty of solitary experiences in
nature while also exploring themes of isolation, connection, and the passage of time.

143

--- PAGE 144 ---
Words Meanings

salitary | alone, without companions | alone |
Fan unmarried git orayougwoman |
melancholy | depression, sloomy state of mind <i
eee ee ar
alley SS
profound | deep, penetrating SSC‘
Toons SSC~SSSCSCSCSCSCSCSCS
expressing sorrow sad —SSSC~C~SSSSSCSCSCSC~C~*d
a

Oral Communication
Demonstrate attentive listening skills while working in the whole class setting and taking
turns to speak with standard pronunciation
1. Group discussion can be held among the students for better understanding of the
poem.
The word ‘solitary clearly indicates the loneliness in the atmosphere; the Scottish girl singing
all alone while cutting the grain.

2. Discuss the singing of the cuckoo-bird/nightingale in the Arabian desert. What possibly
can be the significance?

3. Give your views that what is the song of the girl about.

4. It looked like her song would never end, as she was singing while bending over to cut
the wheat with a sickle. Comment if you think she was more absorbed in cutting wheat
or singing a song.

5. What possibly could be the reason that the narrator kept listening her song without
moving; specially when he was not understanding the language.

Inference
a) How would you justify that music and song enhance the mood of the listener?
b) Does the silence of the sea create silence in the atmosphere?

Comprehension

1. Whois the solitary reaper? Where does the poet encounter the solitary reaper?

2. How does the speaker describe the girl's song? What emotions does it evoke in him?
3. What inspired the poet to write “The Solitary Reaper”?
4

. Give reason of Wordsworth's comparison.of the solitary reaper’s song to that of the
nightingale in the poem “The Solitary Reaper”.

144

--- PAGE 145 ---
5. Whois the poet addressing when he says: stop here, or gently pass?

6. Give reasons of the narrator not understanding the song sung by the Scottish girl.

7. Do you think the speaker suggests that poetry's power lies less in its content and more inits
rhythm? Relate it with the content.

8. Inwhat way is the nightingale’s song ‘welcome’ and the cuckoo's song ‘thrilling?

9. Discuss the central theme of the poem.

10. How does the poet show the reaper’s song had a lasting effect on him?

11. Evaluate two or more central ideas of this poem and analyze their development over the
course of the text, including how they interact and build on one another to provide a

complex analysis.

12. Extract salient points and develop a mind map to summarize a variety of information in
the poem.

13. Transfer the written text of the poem into a flowchart or work plan.

1. Circle the correct option.
The speaker describes the Highland girl as: ‘
a) Joyful and carefree b) Solitary and melancholic
c) Energetic and enthusiastic d) Content and peaceful
The speaker uses the word ‘overflowing’ to describe:
a) The amount of grain the girl has harvested
b) The beauty of the surrounding landscape
c) The abundance of wildlife in the valley
d) The volume of the girl's song
The speaker mentions ‘the farthest Hebrides’ to ongesize:
a) The vastness of the ocean b) The girl's isolation and loneliness
Cc) The power of music to travel far and wide
d) The cultural diversity of Scotland
The phrase’ the plaintive numbers flow’ suggests that the girl's song is:
a) Upbeat and cheerful b) Slow and mournful
c) Loud and passionate d) Fast and lively
The speaker says he listened to the song ‘motionless and still’ to:
a) Show respect for the girl's talent
b) Avoid disturbing the girl's concentration
c) Focus all his attention to the song
d) Show his own fatigue from the journey
The speaker's final statement, ‘Long after it was heard no more’ implies that;
a) He forgot the song quickly b) He missed the girl's singing dearly
c) He was grateful for the temporary experience
d) He was disappointed by the song's ending

145

--- PAGE 146 ---
Grammar and Language

The poetic devices used in the poem ‘The Solitary Reaper’.

¢ Hyperbole and Alliteration
Hyperbole is an exaggeration for effect, while alliteration is the repetition of initial sounds.
Examples of alliteration in the poem The solitary Reaper’ are in the phrases, ‘No Nightingale’,

‘Among Arabian’. ‘Silence of the Seas’.In each of these phrases, the initial sound is repeated, which
is the technique of alliteration.

According to the poet, solitary reaper's song can be heard ‘breaking the silence of the seas, Among
the farthest Hebrides. The Hebrides are an island along the northern coast of Scotland, which
means that her voice was travelling for miles and miles, which is exaggeration of hyperbole.

¢ Metaphor
The poet uses metaphors to compare the reaper's song to the nightingale’s and cuckoo's song,
highlighting the beauty and impact of her singing.

¢ Enjambment
The poet uses enjambment to create a flowing, continuous feel to the poem, much like the
unbroken song of the reaper.

¢ Imagery
Imagery used ina literary work enables the readers to perceive things involving their five senses.

Example: ‘Reaping and singing by herself’, ‘| saw her singing at her work’, and ‘More welcome notes
to weary bands’, gives a pictorial description of the young woman at work.

a) Questions related to the poem
1. How do you think the reaper’s song creates a connection across linguistic and cultural
boundaries?
2. Describe the reason the speaker imagines what the reaper might be singing about?
3. Write the summary of the poem The Solitary Reaper’.
4. Write in detail how does the atmosphere of the poem and the song of the girl leave a
lasting impression on the mind of the poet.
b) Formal letters and emails to people in extended academic (professional) environments for
various purposes
Email Writing
Writing professional emails in the workplace
What is email communication? .
Electronic mail (e-mail) is a computer-based application for the exchange of messages
between users. A worldwide e-mail network allows people to exchange e-mail messages very
quickly. E-mail is the electronic equivalent of aletter, but with advantages in timeliness and

flexibility.
When to send an email?
Email is one of many available communication technologies in the workplace.In general,

146

--- PAGE 147 ---
email is good for positive or neutral news and sharing information. Sometimes other methods
of communication (face-to-face, phone, instant messaging, video conferencing, etc.) may be
more appropriate.

Types of email in the workplace

There are two primary types of email in the workplace:

Request-and-Reply Emails: Most emails in the workplace fall into this category. Request
emails usually expect a reply. This kind of email could ask questions, specify tasks people
need to complete, or ask colleagues to acknowledge or comment on policies, meetings, or
projects.

Confirmation Emails: This kind of email creates a permanent, written record of a
conversation that has taken place. For example, if you and a colleague discussed
collaborating on a project over lunch, you might send them an email with the details of that
conversation. This gives you both a record of the conversation and allows for the conversation
to continue, if needed.

Essential email components

Subjectline

The subject line of your email should offer your reader the purpose of the email, but it

should also be brief. If your subject line is vague, people may ignore your email, or it may

be sent to the junk/spam folder. 2

Vague: Budget

Specific: Budget Revision Request

Greeting

Choosing a greeting may appear to be an easy task, but you have to select the appropriate
level of formality. Emailing a coworker with whom you are friends to ask a brief question is
different from emailing your supervisor with a work-related request. Below are some
greetings that straddle different levels of formality:

More formal:

Dear [Name],

Hello [Name],

Good morning/afternoon [Name],

Less formal:

Hi [Name],

Hey [Name],

Body

Depending on how your audience will react to the information in your email, you will
need to decide whether to structure your email body using the direct or indirect method
of communication. Either way, paragraphs in an email, when there is more than one,
should be clear and concise. They are generally much shorter than paragraphs in an
academic essay, for example. The »irect Method of Communication Except in the cases listed
below, use the direct method of communication when constructing an email. This method is
used when your reader is already informed about the subject and/or will already be
supportive of the information provided. The content of your email will provide the following
pieces of information, in this order:

em a ee a

147

--- PAGE 148 ---
* Main point/decision/request

* Background or context for the main point of the email (if required)

* Closing paragraph - summary, action items, polite closing
The Indirect Method of Communication
While you want to avoid delivering really bad news by email (face-to-face is the preferred method
for sensitive subjects), if you are delivering information that your reader may not immediately
support or that they need to be educated about, your email should be structured according to the
indirect method of communication. This gives the reader time to consider rationale or
background before encountering the main message:

+ Background or context for the main point of the email (always included in the indirect

method)

* Main point/decision/request

* Closing paragraph - summary, action items, polite closing

* Sign-off
As with the greeting, you need to choose an appropriate sign-off for your audience:
More format:

Sincerely,

Thanks/Thank you,

Best,

All the best,

Best regards,

Kind regards

Less formal: Si SS
Talk soon, peg eer gta tat
Cheers, reer epreeman rare ne memeene
See you,

The Direct Method of Communication

Task: Write an email to the manager of a
well-reputed bank and apply against the
vacant post of cashier in this bank . Tell
him briefly about your work experience
and future aims. oe ere

Teacher's Note:

+ Ask students to evaluate two or more central ideas of a text and analyze their development over
the course of the text, including how they interact and build on one another to provide a complex
analysis.

Encourage them to cite strong and thorough textual evidence to support analysis of what the text
says explicitly as well as inferences drawn from the text.

Help them to demonstrate understanding of figurative language, word relationships, and nuances

in word meanings.
Motivate them to write emails to people in extended academic (professional) environments for

various purposes.

148

--- PAGE 149 ---
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:

evaluate how authors use language, including figurative language, considering the impact on the
reader. Discuss others’ reading critically, taking account of their views. Express informed opinions,
justify the viewpoint and make recommendations and develop an interest in a variety of texts.

analyse how an author's choices concerning how to structure specific parts of a text (e.g., the
choice of where to begin or end a story, the choice to provide a comedic or tragic resolution)
contribute to its overall structure and meaning as well as its aesthetic impact.

evaluate the particular elements of a story or drama (e.g., how the setting shapes the characters or
plot).identify rhyme schemes and figurative language in poems. Evaluate stages of plot
development in a fictional text.(exposition, setting, climax, character development,
resolution).Examine how complex characters (e.g., those with multiple or conflicting motivations)
develop over the course of a text, interact with other characters, and advance the plot or develop
the theme.

analyze multiple interpretations of a story, drama, or poem (e.g., recorded or live production of a
play or recorded novel or poetry), evaluating how each version interprets the source text.

read, view and analyse a variety of reading grade-appropriate and high-interest books and texts
from print and non-print sources: Drama (play scripts)

write formal letters and emails to people in extended
* academic (professional) environments for various purposes.

--- PAGE 150 ---
re- Reading
a) Have you ever read a novel?

b) Tell the theme of this novel which you have read recently?

“In the town they tell the story of the great pearl- how it was found and how it was lost
again. They tell of Kino, the fisherman, and of his wife, Juana, and of the baby, Coyotito.
And because the story has been told so often, it has taken root in every man's mind. And, as
with all retold tales that are in people's hearts, there are only good and bad things and
black and white things and good and evil things and no in-between anywhere.

“If this story is a parable, perhaps everyone takes his own meaning from it and reads his own
life into it. Inany case, they say in the town that...”

Chapter 1

Kino awakened in the near dark. The stars still shone and the day had drawn only a pale wash of
light in the lower sky to the east. The roosters had been crowing for some time, and the early
animals were already beginning their ceaseless turning of twigs and bits of wood to see whether
anything to eat had been overlooked. Outside the brush house in the tuna clump, a covey of little
birds chittered and flurried with their wings.

Kino’s eyes opened, and he looked first at the lightening square which was the door and then he
looked at the hanging box where Coyotito slept. And last he turned his head to Juana, his wife,
who lay on the mat, her blue head shawl over her nose and around the small of her back. Juana’s
eyes were open too. Kino could never remember seeing them closed when he awakened. Her dark
eyes made little reflected stars. She was looking at him as she was always looking at him When he
awakened.

Kino heard the little splash of morning waves on the beach. It was very good- Kino closed his eyes
again to listen to his music. Perhaps he alone did this and perhaps all of his people did it. His
people had once been great makers of songs so that everything they saw or thought
or did or heard became a song. That was very long ago. The songs remained; Kino knew them, but
no new songs were added. That does not mean that there were no personal songs. In Kino's head
there was a song now, clear and soft, and if he had been able to speak of it, he would have called it
the Song of the Family.

His blanket was over his nose to protect him from the dank air. His eyes flicked to a rustle beside
him. It was Juana arising, almost soundlessly. On her hard bare feet she went to the hanging box
where Coyotito slept, and she leaned over and said a Little reassuring word.

Coyotito looked up for a moment and closed his eyes and slept again.

Juana went to the fire pit and uncovered a coal and fanned it alive while she broke little piesh
over it.

Now Kino got up and wrapped his blanket about his head and nose and shoulders. He slipped his
feet into his sandals and went outside to watch the dawn.

Outside the door he squatted down and gathered the blanket ends about his knees. He saw the
specks of Gulf clouds flame high in the air. And a goat came near and sniffed at him and stared with

150

--- PAGE 151 ---
its cold yellow eyes. Behind him Juana's fire leaped into flame and threw spears of light through
the chinks of the brush-house wall and threw a wavering square of light out the door. A late moth
blustered in to find the fire. The Song of the Family came now from behind Kino. And the rhythm of
the family song was the grinding stone where Juana worked the corn for the morning cakes.

The dawn came quickly now, a wash, a glow, a lightness, and then an explosion of fire as the sun
arose out of the Gulf. Kino looked down to cover his eyes from the glare. He could hear the pat of
the corncakes in the house and the rich smell of them on the cooking plate. The ants were busy on
the ground, big black ones with shiny bodies, and little dusty quick ants. Kino watched with the
detachment of God while a dusty ant frantically tried to escape the sand trap an ant lion had dug
for him. A thin, timid dog came close and, at a soft word from Kino, curled up, arranged its tail
neatly over its feet, and laid its chin delicately on the pile. It was a black dog with yellow-gold
spots where its eyebrows should have been. It was a morning like other mornings and yet perfect
among mornings.

Kino heard the creak of the rope when Juana took Coyotito out of his hanging box and cleaned
him. Kino could see these things without looking at them. Juana sang softly an ancient song that
had only three notes and yet endless variety of interval. And this was part of the family song too.
It was all part. Sometimes it rose to an aching chord that caught the throat, saying this is safety,
this is warmth, this is the Whole.

Across the brush fence were other brush houses, and the smoke came from them too, and the
sound of breakfast. Kino was young and strong and his black hair hung over his brown forehead.
His eyes were warm and fierce and bright and his mustache was thin and coarse. He lowered his
blanket from his nose now, for the dark poisonous air was gone and the yellow sunlight fell on the
house. Near the brush fence two roosters bowed and feinted at each other with squared wings and
neck feathers ruffed out. It would be a clumsy fight. They were not game chickens. Kino watched
them for a moment, and then his eyes went up to a flight of wild doves twinkling inland to the
hills. The world was awake now, and Kino arose and went into his brush house.

As he came through the door Juana stood up from the glowing fire pit. She put Coyotito back in his
hanging box and then she combed her black hair and braided it in two braids and tied the ends
with thin green ribbon. Kino squatted by the fire pit and rolled a hot corncake and
dipped it in sauce and ate it. And he drank a little tea and that was breakfast. That was the only
breakfast he had ever known outside of feast days and one incredible fiesta on cookies that had
nearly killed him. When Kino had finished, Juana came back to the fire and ate her
breakfast. They had spoken once, but there is no need for speech if it is only a habit anyway. Kino
sighed with satisfaction- and that was conversation.

The sun was warmirtg the brush house, breaking through its crevices in long streaks. And one of
the streaks fell on the hanging box where Coyotito lay, and on the ropes that held it. It was a tiny
movement that drew their eyes to the hanging box. Kino and Juana froze in their
positions. Down the rope that hung the baby’s box from the roof support a scorpion moved slowly.
His stinging tail was straight out behind him, but he could whip it up in a flash of time.

Kino’s breath whistled in his nostrils and he opened his mouth to stop it. And then the startled look
was gone from him and the rigidity from his body. |n his mind a new song had come, the Song of
Evil, the music of the enemy, of any foe of the family, a savage, secret, dangerous
melody, and underneath, the Song of the Family cried plaintively. The scorpion moved delicately
down the rope toward the box. Under her breath Juana repeated an ancient magic to guard
against such evil, and on top of that she muttered a Hail Mary between clenched teeth. But Kino

151

--- PAGE 152 ---
was in motion. His body glided quietly across the room, noiselessly and smoothly. His hands were
in front of him, palms down, and his eyes were on the scorpion. Beneath it in the hanging box
Coyotito laughed and reached up his hand toward it. It sensed danger when Kino was almost
within reach of it. It stopped, and its tail rose up over its back in little jerks and the curved thorn
on the tail’s end glistened.

Kino stood perfectly still. He could hear Juana whispering the old magic again, and he could hear
the evil music of the enemy. He could not move until the scorpion moved, and it felt for the source
of the death that was coming to it. Kino's hand went forward very slowly, very
smoothly. The thorned tail jerked upright. And at that moment the laughing Coyotito shook the
rope and the scorpion fell.

Kino's Di leaped to catch it, but it fell past his fingers, fell on the baby’s shoulder, landed and
struck. Then, snarling, Kino had it, had it in his fingers, rubbing it to a paste in his hands. He threw
it down and beat it into the earth floor with his fist, and Coyotito screamed with pain in his box.
But Kino beat and stamped the enemy until it was only a fragment and a moist place in the dirt.
His teeth were bared and fury flared in his eyes and the Song of the Enemy roared in his ears.

But Juana had the baby in her arms now. She found the puncture with redness starting from it
already. She put her lips down over the puncture and sucked hard and spat and sucked again while
Coyotito screamed.

Kino hovered; he was helpless, he was in the way.

The screams of the baby brought the neighbors. Out of their brush houses they poured- Kino's
brother Juan Tomas and his fat wife Apolonia and their four children crowded in the door and
blocked the entrance, while behind them others tried to look in, and one small boy crawled
among legs to have a look. And those in front passed the word back to those behind- “Scorpion.
The baby has been stung.”

Juana stopped sucking the puncture for a moment. The little hole was slightly enlarged and its
edges whitened from the sucking, but the red swelling extended farther around it in a hard
lymphatic mound. And all of these people knew about the scorpion. An adult might be very ill
from the sting, but a baby could easily die from the poison. First, they knew, would come swelling
and fever and tightened throat, and then cramps in the stomach, and then Coyotito might die if
enough of the poison had gone in. But the stinging pain of the bite was going away.
Coyotito's screams turned to moans.

Kino had wondered often at the iron in his patient, fragile wife. She, who was obedient and
respectful and cheerful and patient, she could arch her back in child pain with hardly a cry. She
could stand fatigue and hunger almost better than Kino himself. In the canoe she was like a strong
man. And now she did a most surprising thing.

“The doctor,” she said. "Go to get the doctor.”

The word was passed out among the neighbors where they stood close packed in the little yard
behind the brush fence. And they repeated among themselves, “Juana wants the doctor.” A
wonderful thing, a memorable thing, to want the doctor. To get him would be a remarkable
thing. The doctor never came to the cluster of ‘brush houses. Why should he, when he had more
than he could do to take care of the rich people who lived in the stone and plaster houses of the

town.
“He would not come,” the people in the yard said.
“He would not come,” the people in the door said, and the thought got into Kino.

152

?

--- PAGE 153 ---
“The doctor would not come,” Kino said to Juana.
She looked up at him, her eyes as cold as the eyes of a lioness. This was Juana's first baby- this was
nearly everything there was in Juana’s world. And Kino saw her determination and the music of
the family sounded in his head with a steely tone.

“Then we will go to him,” Juana said, and with one hand she arranged her dark blue shawl over her
head and made of one end of it a sling to hold the moaning baby and made of the other end of it a
shade over his eyes to protect him from the light. The people in the door pushed against those
behind to let her through. Kino followed her. They went out of the gate to the rutted path and the
neighbors followed them.

The thing had become a neighborhood affair. They made a quick soft-footed procession into the
center of the town, first Juana and Kino, and behind them Juan Tomas and Apolonia, then all the
neighbors with the children trotting on the flanks. And the yellow sun threw their black shadows
ahead of them so that they walked on their own shadows.

They came to the place where the brush houses stopped and the city of stone and plaster began,
the city of harsh outer walls and inner cool gardens where a little water played and the
bougainvillea crusted the walls with purple and brick-red and white. They heard from the secret
gardens the singing of caged birds and heard the splash of cooling water on hot flagstones. The
procession crossed the blinding plaza and passed in front of the church. It had grown now, and on
the outskirts the hurrying newcomers were being softly informed how the baby had been stung by
a scorpion, how the father and mother were taking it to the doctor.

And the newcomers, particularly the beggars from the front of the church who were great experts
in financial analysis, looked quickly at Juana’s old blue skirt, saw the tears in her shawl, appraised
the green ribbon on her braids, read the age of Kino's blanket and the thousand washings of his
clothes, and set them down as poverty people and went along to see what kind of drama might
develop. The four beggars in front of the church knew everything in the town. They were students
of the expressions of young women as they went in to confession, and they saw them as they came
out and read the nature of the sin.

They knew every little scandal and some very big crimes. They slept at their posts in the shadow
of the church so that no one crept in for consolation without their knowledge. And they knew the
doctor. They knew his ignorance, his cruelty, his avarice, his sins.

They knew his clumsy attitudeThey had seen his corpses go into the church. And, since early Mass
was over and business was slow, they followed the procession, these endless searchers after
perfect knowledge of their fellow men, to see what the fat lazy doctor would do about an indigent
baby with a scorpion bite.

The scurrying procession came at last to the big gate in the wall of the doctor's house. They could
hear the splashing water and the singing of caged birds and the sweep of the long brooms on the
flagstones. And they could smell the frying of meat from the doctor's house.

Kino hesitated a moment. This doctor was not of his people. This doctor was of a race which for
nearly four hundred years had beaten and starved and robbed and despised Kino’s race, and
frightened it too, so that the indigene came humbly to the door. And as always when he came near
to one of this race, Kino felt weak and afraid and angry at the same time. Rage and terror went
together. He could kill the doctor more easily than he could talk to him, for all of the doctor's race
spoke to all of Kino's race as though they were simple animals. And as Kino raised his right hand to
the iron ring knocker in the gate, rage swelled in him, and the pounding music of the enemy beat

nO,
153

--- PAGE 154 ---
in his ears, and his lips drew tight against his teeth- but with his left hand he reached to take off
his hat. The iron ring pounded against the gate.

Kino took off his hat and stood waiting. Coyotito moaned a little in Juana’s arms, and she spoke
softly to him. The procession crowded close the better to see and hear.

After a moment the big gate opened a few inches. Kino could see the green coolness of the garden
and little splashing fountain through the opening. The man who looked out at him was one of his
own race. Kino spoke to him in the old language. “The little one- the first born- has
been poisoned by the scorpion,” Kino said. “He requires the skill of the healer.”

The gate closed a little, and the servant refused to speak in the old language. "A little moment,”
he said. “| go to inform myself," and he closed the gate and slid the bolt home. The glaring sun
threw the bunched shadows of the people blackly on the white wall.

In his chamber the doctor sat up in his high bed. He was dressed ina gown of red watered silk that
had come from Paris.On his lap was a silver tray with a silver chocolate pot and a tiny cup of
eggshell china, so delicate that it looked silly when he lifted it with his big hand,
lifted it with the tips of thumb and forefinger and spread the other three fingers wide to get them
out of the way. He was growing very stout, and his voice was hoarse with the fat that pressed on
his throat. Beside him on a table was a small Oriental gong and a bowl of cigarettes. The
furnishings of the room were heavy and dark and gloomy. The pictures were religious, even the
large tinted photograph of his dead wife, who, if Masses willed and paid for out of her own estate
could doit, was in Heaven. The doctor had once for a short time been a part of the great world and
his whole subsequent life was memory and longing for France. “That,” he said, “was civilized
living”- by which he meant that on a small income he had been able to live and eat in restaurants.
He poured his second cup of chocolate and crumbled a sweet biscuit in his fingers. The servant
from the gate came to the open door and stood waiting to be noticed.

“Yes?” the doctor asked.
“It is a little Indian with a baby. He says a scorpion stung it.”

The doctor put his cup down gently before he let his anger rise.
"Have | nothing better to do than cure insect bites for ‘little
Indians? | am a doctor, not a veterinary.”

“Yes, Patron,” said the servant.

"Has he any money?" the doctor demanded. "No, they never have any money. I, | alone in the world
am supposed to work for nothing- and | am tired of it. See if he has any money!”

At the gate the servant opened the door a trifle and looked out at the waiting people. And this
time he spoke in the old language.

“Have you money to pay forthe treatment?"

Now Kino reached into a secret place somewhere under his blanket. He brought out a paper
folded many times. Crease by crease he unfolded it, until at last there came to view eight small
misshapen seed pearls, as ugly and gray as little ulcers, flattened and almost valueless. The
servant took the paper and closed the gate again, but this time he was not gone long. He opened
the gate just wide enough to pass the paper back.

"The doctor has gone out,” he said. "He was called to a serious case.”

And he shut the gate quickly out of shame.

And now a wave of shame went over the whole procession. They melted away. The beggars went

154

--- PAGE 155 ---
back to the church steps, the stragglers moved off, and the neighbors departed so that the public
shaming of Kino would not be in their eyes.

For a long time Kino stood in front of the gate with Juana beside him

Slowly he put his suppliant hat on his head. Then, without warning, he struck the gate a crushing
blow with his fist. He looked down in wonder at his split knuckles and at the blood that flowed
down between his fingers.

Chapter 2

The town lay on a broad estuary, its old yellow plastered buildings hugging the beach. And on the
beach the white and blue canoes that came from Nayarit were drawn up, canoes preserved for
generations by a hard shell-like waterproof plaster whose making was a secret of the fishing
people. They were high and graceful canoes with curving bow and stern and a braced section
midships where a mast could be stepped to carry a small lateen sail.

The beach was yellow sand, but at the water's edge a rubble of shell and algae took its place.
Fiddler crabs bubbled and sputtered in their holes in the sand, and in the shallows little lobsters
popped in and out of their tiny homes in the rubble and sand. The sea bottom was rich with
crawling and swimming and growing things. The brown algae waved in the gentle currents and the
green eel grass swayed and little sea horses clung to its stems. Spotted botete, the poison fish, lay
on the bottom in the eel-grass beds, and the bright-colored swimming crabs scampered over
them.

On the beach the hungry dogs and the hungry pigs of the town searched endlessly for any dead fish
or sea bird that might have floated in on arising tide.

Although the morning was young, the hazy mirage was up. The uncertain air that magnified some
things and blotted out others hung over the whole Gulf so that all sights were unreal and vision
could not be trusted; so that sea and land had the sharp clarities and the vagueness
of a dream. Thus it might be that the people of the Gulf trust things of the spirit and things of the
imagination, but they do not trust their eyes to show them distance or clear outline or any optical
exactness. Across the estuary from the town one section of mangroves stood clear and
telescopically defined, while another mangrove clump was a hazy black-green blob. Part of the
far shore disappeared into a shimmer that looked like water. There was no certainty in seeing, no
proof that what you saw was there or was not there. And the people of the Gulf expected all
places were that way, and it was not strange to them. Acopper haze hung over the water ,and the
hot morning sun beat on it and made it vibrate blindingly.

The brush houses of the fishing people were back from the beach on the right-hand side of the
town, and the canoes were drawn up in front of this area.

Kino and Juana came slowly down to the beach and to Kino's canoe, which was the one thing of
value he owned in the world. It was very old.

Kino's grandfather had brought it from Nayarit, and he had given it to Kino's father, and so it had
come to Kino. It was at once property and source of food, for a man with a boat can guarantee a
woman that she will eat something. It is the bulwark against starvation. And every year Kino
refinished his canoe with the hard shell-like plaster by the secret method that had also come to
him from his father. Now he came to the canoe and touched the bow tenderly as he always did. He
laid his diving rock and his basket and the two ropes in the sand by the canoe.
And he folded his blanket and laid it in the bow.

a tn me re a ea a a

155

--- PAGE 156 ---
Juana laid Coyotito on the blanket, and she placed her shawl over him so that the hot sun could
not shine on him. He was quiet now, but the swelling on his shoulder had continued up his neck and
under his ear and his face was puffed and feverish. Juana went to the water and waded in. She
gathered some brown seaweed and made a flat damp poultice of it, and this she applied to the
baby's swollen shoulder, which was as good a remedy as any and probably better than the doctor
could have done. But the remedy lacked his authority because it was simple and didn't cost
anything. The stomach cramps had not come to Coyotito.

Perhaps Juana had sucked out the poison in time, but she had not sucked out her worry over her
first-born. She had not prayed directly for the recovery of the baby- she had prayed that they
might find a pearl with which to hire the doctor to cure the baby, for the minds of people are as
unsubstantial as the mirage of the Gulf.

Now Kino and Juana slid the canoe down the beach to the water, and when the bow floated, Juana
climbed in, while Kino pushed the stern in and waded beside it until it floated lightly and trembled
on the little breaking waves. Then in coordination Juana and Kino drove their double-bladed
paddles into the sea, and the canoe creased the water and hissed with speed. The other pearlers
were gone out long since. In a few moments Kino could see them clustered in the haze, riding over
the oyster bed.

Light filtered down through the water to the bed where the frilly pearl oysters lay fastened to the
rubbly bottom, a bottom strewn with shells of broken, opened oysters. This was the bed that had
raised the King of Spain to be a great power in Europe in past years, had helped to pay for his wars,
and had decorated the churches for his soul's sake. The gray oysters with ruffles like skirts on the
shells, the barnacle-crusted oysters with little bits of weed clinging to the skirts and small crabs
climbing over them. An accident could happen to these oysters, a grain of sand could lie in the
folds of muscle and irritate the flesh until in self-protection the flesh coated the grain with a layer
of smooth cement. But once started, the flesh continued to coat the foreign body until it fell free
in some tidal flurry or until the oyster was destroyed. For centuries men had dived down and torn
the oysters from the beds and ripped them open, looking for the coated grains of sand. Swarms of
fish lived near the bed to live near the oysters thrown back by the searching men and to nibble at
the shining inner shells. But the pearls were accidents, and the finding of one was luck, a little pat
on the back by God or the gods or both.

Kino had two ropes, one tied to a heavy stone and one to a basket. He stripped off his shirt and
trousers and laid his hat in the bottom of the canoe. The water was oily smooth. He took his rock in
one hand and his basket in the other, and he slipped feet first over the side and
the rock carried him to the bottom. The bubbles rose behind him until the water cleared and he
could see. Above, the surface of the water was an undulating mirror of brightness, and he could
see the bottoms of the canoes sticking through it.

Kino moved cautiously so that the water would not be obscured with mud or sand. He hooked
his foot in the loop on his rock and his hands worked quickly, tearing the oysters loose, some
singly, others in clusters. He laid them in his basket. In some places the oysters clung to one
another so that they came free in lumps.

Now, Kino'’s people had sung of everything that happened or existed.
They had made songs to the fishes, to the sea in anger and to the sea in calm, to the light and the
dark and the sun and the moon, and the songs were all in Kino and in his people- every song that
had ever been made, even the ones forgotten. And as he filled his basket the song was in Kino, and

156

--- PAGE 157 ---
the beat of the song was his pounding heart as it ate the oxygen from his held breath, and the
melody of the song was the gray-green water and the little scuttling animals and the clouds of fish
that flitted by and were gone. But in the song there was a secret little inner song, hardly
perceptible, but always there, sweet and secret and clinging, almost hiding in the counter-
melody, and this was the Song of the Pearl That Might Be, for every shell thrown in the basket
might contain a pearl. Chance was against it, but luck and the gods might be for it. And in the
canoe above him Kino knew that Juana was making the magic of prayer, her face set rigid and her
muscles hard to force the luck, to tear the luck out of the gods’ hands, for she needed the luck for
the swollen shoulder of Coyotito. And because the need was great and the desire was great, the
little secret melody of the pearl that might be was stronger this morning. Whole phrases of it
came clearly and softly into the Song of the Undersea.

Kino, in his pride and youth and strength, could remain down over two minutes without strain, so
that he worked deliberately, selecting the largest shells. Because they were disturbed, the oyster
shells were tightly closed. A little to his right a hummock of rubbly rock stuck up, covered with
young oysters not ready to take. Kino moved next to the hummock, and then, beside it, under a
little overhang, he saw a very large oyster lying by itself, not covered with its clinging brothers.
The shell was partly open, for the overhang protected this ancient oyster, and in the lip-like
muscle Kino saw a ghostly gleam, and then the shell closed down. His heart beat out a heavy
rhythm and the melody of the maybe pear! shrilled in his ears. Slowly he forced the oyster loose
and held it tightly against his breast. He kicked his foot free from the rock loop, and his body rose
to the surface and his black hair gleamed in the sunlight. He reached over the side of the canoe
and laid the oyster in the bottom.

Then Juana steadied the boat while he climbed in. His eyes were shining with excitement, but in
decency he pulled up his rock, and then he pulled up his basket of oysters and lifted them in.
Juana sensed his excitement, and she pretended to look away, It is not good to want a thing too
much. It sometimes drives the luck away. You must want it just enough, and you must be very
tactful with God. But Juana stopped breathing. Very deliberately Kino opened his short strong
knife. He looked speculatively at the basket. Perhaps it would be better to open the oyster last.
He took a small oyster from the basket, cut the muscle, searched the folds of flesh, and threw it in
the water.

Then he seemed to see the great oyster for the first time. He squatted in the bottom of the canoe,
picked up the shell and examined it. The flutes were shining black to brown, and only a few small
barnacles adhered to the shell. Now Kino was reluctant to open it. What he had
seen, he knew, might be a reflection, a piece of flat shell accidently drifted in or a complete
illusion. In this Gulf of uncertain light there were more illusions than realities.

But Juana’s eyes were on him and she could not wait. She put her hand on Coyotito’s covered head.
"Open it,” she said softly.

Kino deftly slipped his knife into the edge of the shell. Through the knife he could feel the muscle
tighten hard. He worked the blade lever-wise and the closing muscle parted and the shell fell
apart. The lip-like flesh writhed up and then subsided. Kino lifted the flesh, and there it lay, the
great pearl, perfect as the moon. It captured the light and refined it and gave it back in silver
incandescence. It was as large as a sea-gull's egg. It was the greatest pearl in the world. Juana
caught her breath and moaned a little. And to Kino the secret melody of the maybe pearl broke
clear and beautiful, rich and warm and lovely, glowing and gloating and triumphant. In the
surface of the great pearl he could see dream forms. He picked the pearl from the dying flesh and

ee

157

--- PAGE 158 ---
held it in his palm, and he turned it over and saw that its curve was perfect. Juana came near to
stare at it in his hand, and it was the hand he had smashed against the doctor's gate, and the torn
flesh of the knuckles was turned grayish white by the sea water.

instinctively Juana went to Coyotito where he lay on his father’s blanket. She lifted the poultice
of seaweed and looked at the shoulder.

“Kino,” she cried shrilly.

He looked past his pearl, and he saw that the swelling was going out of the baby’s shoulder, the
poison was receding from its body. Then Kino’s fist closed over the pearl and his emotion broke
over him. He put back his head and howled. His eyes rolled up and he screamed and his body was

rigid. The men in the other canoes looked up, startled, and then they dug their paddles into the
sea and raced toward Kino's canoe.

Chapter 3

Atown is a thing like a colonial animal. A town has a nervous system and a head and shoulders and
feet. A town is a thing separate from all other towns, so that there are no two towns alike. Anda
town has a whole emotion. How news travels through a town is a mystery not easily to be solved.

News seems to move faster than small boys can scramble and dart to tell it, faster than women
can call it over the fences.

Before Kino and Juana and the other fishers had come to Kino's brush house, the nerves of the
town were pulsing and vibrating with the news-Kino had found the Peart of the World. Before
panting little boys could strangle out the words, their mothers knew it. The news swept on past
the brush houses, and it washed in a foaming wave into the town of stone and plaster. It came to
the priest walking in his garden, and it put a thoughtful look in his eyes and a memory of certain
repairs necessary to the church. He wondered what the pearl would be worth. And he wondered
whether he had baptized Kino's baby, or married him for that matter. The news came to the
shopkeepers, and they looked at men's clothes that had not sold so well.

The news came to the doctor where he sat with a woman whose illness was age, though neither
she nor the doctor would admit it. And when it was made plain who Kino was, the doctor grew
stern and judicious at the same time. “He is a client of mine,” the doctor said. "| am treating his
child for a scorpion sting.” And the doctor's eyes rolled up a little in their fat hammocks and he
thought of Paris. He remembered the room he had lived in there as a great and luxurious place,
and he remembered the hard-faced woman who had lived with him as a beautiful and kind girl,
although she had been none of these three. The doctor looked past his aged patient and saw
himself sitting in a restaurant in Paris and a waiter was just opening a bottle of wine.

The news came early to the beggars in front of the church, and it made them giggle a little
with pleasure, for they knew that there is no almsgiver in the world like a poor man who is
suddenly lucky.

Kino has found the Pearl of the World. In the town, in little offices, sat the men who bought pearls
from the fishers. They waited in their chairs until the pearls came in, and then they cackled and
fought and shouted and threatened until they reached the lowest price the
fisherman would stand. But there was a price below which they dared not go, for it had happened
that a fisherman in despair had given his pearls to the church. And when thé buying was over,
these buyers sat alone and their fingers played restlessly with the pearls, and they
wished they owned the pearls. For there were not many buyers really- there was only one, and he

158

--- PAGE 159 ---
CC ————————

a

kept these agents in separate offices to give a semblance of competition. The news came to these
men, and their eyes squinted and their fingertips burned a little, and each one
thought how the patron could not live forever and someone had to take his place. And each one
thought how with some capital he could get a new start.

All manner of people grew interested in Kino- people with things to sell and people with favors to
ask. Kino had found the Pearl of the World. The essence of pearl mixed with essence of men anda
curious dark residue was precipitated. Every man suddenly became related to
Kino's pearl, and Kino’s pearl went into the dreams, the speculations, the schemes, the plans, the
futures, the wishes, the needs, the lusts, the hungers, of everyone, and only one person stood in
the way and that was Kino, so that he became curiously every man’s enemy. The news
stirred up something infinitely black and evil in the town; the black distillate was like the
scorpion, or like hunger in the smell of food, or like loneliness when love is withheld. The poison
sacs of the town began to manufacture venom, and the town swelled and puffed with the pressure
of it.

But Kino and Juana did not know these things. Because they were happy and excited they thought
everyone shared their joy. Juan Tomas and Apolonia did, and they were the world too. In the
afternoon, when the sun had gone over the mountains of the Peninsula to sink in the outward sea,
Kino squatted in his house with Juana beside him. And the brush house was crowded with
neighbors. Kino held the great pearl in his hand, and it was warm and alive in his hand. And the
music of the pearl had merged with the music of the family so that one beautified the other. The
neighbors looked at the pearl in Kino’s hand and they wondered how such luck could come to any
man.

And Juan Tomas, who squatted on Kino's right hand because he was his brother, asked, “What will
you do now that you have become a rich man?”

Kino looked into his pearl, and Juana cast her eyelashes down and arranged her shawl to cover her
face so that her excitement could not be seen. And in the incandescence of the pearl the pictures
formed of the things Kino’s mind had considered in the past and had given up as impossible. In the
pearl he saw Juana and Coyotito and himself standing and kneeling at the high altar, and they
were being married now that they could pay. He spoke softly, "We will be married- in the church.”

In the pearl he saw how they were dressed- Juana in a shawl stiff with newness and a new skirt,
and from under the long skirt Kino could see that she wore shoes. It was in the pearl- the picture
glowing there. He himself was dressed in new white clothes, and he carried a new hat- not of
straw but of fine black felt- and he too wore shoes- not sandals but shoes that laced. But Coyotito-
he was the one- he wore a blue sailor suit from the United States and a little yachting cap such as
Kino had seen once when a pleasure boat put into the estuary. All of these things Kino saw in the
tucent pearl and he said, "We will have new clothes.” :

And the music of the pearl rose like a chorus of trumpets in his ears.

Then to the lovely gray surface of the pearl came the little things Kino wanted: a harpoon to take
the place of one lost a year ago, a new harpoon of iron with a ring in the end of the shaft; and- his
mind could hardly make the leap- a rifle- but why not, since he was sorich.

And Kino saw Kino in the pearl, Kino holding a Winchester carbine. It was the wildest daydreaming
and very pleasant. His lips moved hesitantly over this- "Arifle," he said. "Perhaps a rifle.”

It was the rifle that broke down the barriers. This was an impossibility, and if he could think of

having a rifle whole horizons were burst and he could rush on. For it is said that humans are never

159

--- PAGE 160 ---
satisfied, that you give them one thing and they want something more.

And this is said in disparagement, whereas it is one of the greatest talents the species has and one
that has made it superior to animals that are satisfied with what they have.

The neighbors, close pressed and silent in the house, nodded their heads at his wild imaginings.
And a man in the rear murmured, “Arifle.

He will have a rifle.”

But the music of the pearl was shrilling with triumph in Kino. Juana looked up, and her eyes were
wide at Kino’s courage and at his imagination. And electric strength had come to him now the
horizons were kicked out. In the pearl he saw Coyotito sitting at a little desk in a school, just as
Kino had once seen it through an open door. And Coyotito was dressed in a jacket, and he had ona
white collar, and a broad silken tie. Moreover, Coyotito was writing on a big piece of paper. Kino
looked at his neighbors fiercely. “My son will go to school,” he said, and the neighbors were
hushed. Juana caught her breath sharply. Her eyes were bright as she watched him, and she
looked quickly down at Coyotito in her arms to see whether this might be possible.

But Kino's face shone with prophecy. “My son will read and open the books, and my son will write
and will know writing. And my son will make numbers, and these things will make us free because
he will know-he will know and through him we will know." And in the pearl Kino saw himself and
Juana squatting by the little fire in the brush hut while Coyotito read from a great book. "This is
what the pearl will do,” said Kino. And he had never said so many words together in his life. And
suddenly he was afraid of his talking. His hand closed down over the
pearl and cut the light away from it. Kino was afraid as a man is afraid who says, “I! will,” without
knowing.

Now the neighbors knew they had witnessed a great marvel. They knew that time would now date
from Kino’s pearl, and that they would discuss this moment for many years to come. If these things
came to pass, they would recount how Kino looked and what he said and how his eyes shone, and
they would say, “He was a man transfigured. Some power was given to him, and there it started.
You see what a great man he has become, starting from that moment. And | myself saw it.”

And if Kino’s planning came to nothing, those same neighbors would say, “There it started. A
foolish madness came over him so that he spoke foolish words. God keep us from such things. Yes,
God punished Kino because he rebelled against the way things are. Yousee what has become of
him. And I myself saw the moment when his reason left him.”

Kino looked down at his closed hand and the knuckles were scabbed over and tight where he had
struck the gate.

Now the dusk was coming. And Juana looped her shawl under the baby so that he hung against her
back, and she went to the fire hole and dug a coal from the ashes and broke a few twigs over it and
fanned a flame alive. The little flames danced on the faces of the neighbors.

They knew they should go to their own dinners, but they were reluctant to leave.

The dark was almost in, and Juana’s fire threw shadows on the brush walls when the whisper came
in, passed from mouth to mouth. "The Father is coming- the priest is coming.” The men uncovered
their heads and stepped back from the door, and the women gathered their shawls about their
faces and cast down their eyes. Kino and Juan Tomas, his brother, stood up. The priest came in- a

graying, aging man with an old skin and a young mare eye. Children, he considered these people,
and he treated them like children.

160

--- PAGE 161 ---
The Pearl

“Kino,” he said softly, “thou art named after a great man- and a great Father of the Church.” He
made it sound like a benediction. "Thy namesake tamed the desert and sweetened the minds of
thy people, didst thou know that? It is in the books.”

Kino looked quickly down at Coyotito’s head, where he hung on Juana’s back. Someday, his mind
said, that boy would know what things were in the books and what things were not. The music had
gone out of Kino's head, but now, thinly, slowly, the melody of the morning, the music of evil, of
the enemy, sounded, but it was faint and weak. And Kino looked at his neighbors to see who might
have brought this song in.

But the priest was speaking again. "It has come to me that thou hast found a great fortune, a great
pearl.”

Kino opened his hand and held it out, and the priest gasped a little at the size and beauty of the
pearl. And then he said, "I hope thou wilt remember to give thanks, my son, to Him who has given
thee this treasure, and to pray for guidance in the future.”

Kino nodded dumbly, and it was Juana who spoke softly. "We will, Father. And we will be
; married now. Kino has said so." She looked at the neighbors for confirmation, and they nodded
their heads solemnly.

Thé priest said, “It is pleasant to see that your first thoughts are good thoughts. God bless you, my
children.” He turned and left quietly, and the people let him through.

But Kino’s hand had closed tightly on the pearl again, and he was glancing about suspiciously, for
the evil song was in his ears, shrilling against the music of the pearl.

The neighbors slipped away to go to their houses, and Juana squatted by the fire and set her clay
pot of boiled beans over the little flame.

Kino stepped to the doorway and looked out. As always, he could smell the smoke from many
fires, and he could see the hazy stars and feel the damp of the night air so that he covered his nose
from it. The thin dog came to him and threshed itself in greeting like a windblown flag, and Kino
looked down at it and didn't see it. He had broken through the horizons into a cold and lonely
outside. He felt alone and unprotected, and scraping crickets and shrilling tree frogs and croaking
toads seemed to be carrying the melody of evil. Kino shivered a little and drew his blanket more
tightly against his nose. He carried the pearl still in his hand, tightly closed in his palm, and it was
warm and smooth against his skin.

Behind him he heard Juana patting the cakes before she put them down on the clay cooking
sheet. Kino felt all the warmth and security of his family behind him, and the Song of the Family
came from behind him like the purring of a kitten. But now, by saying what his future was going to
be like, he had created it. Aplan is a real thing, and things projected are experienced. Aplan once
made and visualized becomes a reality along with other realities- never to be destroyed but easily
to be attacked. Thus Kino's future was real, but having set it up, other forces were set up to
destroy it, and this he knew, so that he had to prepare to meet the attack. And this Kino knew also-
that the gods do not love men’s plans, and the gods do not love success unless it comes by
accident. He knew that the gods take their revenge on a man if he be successful through his own
efforts. Consequently Kino was afraid of plans, but having made one, he could never destroy it.
And to meet the attack, Kino was already making a hard skin for himself against the world. His -
eyes and his mind probed for danger before it appeared.

Standing in the door, he saw two men approach; and one of them carried a lantern which lighted

DL
161

--- PAGE 162 ---
the ground and the legs of the men. They turned in through the opening of Kino's brush fence and
came to his door. And Kino saw that one was the doctor and the other the servant who had opened
the gate in the morning. The split knuckles on Kino’s right hand burned when he saw who they
were.

The doctor said, "I was not in when you came this morning. But now, at the first chance, | have
come to see the baby.”

Kino stood in the door, filling it, and hatred raged and flamed in back of his eyes, and fear too, for
the hundreds of years of subjugation were cut deep in him.

"The baby is nearly well now,” he said curtly.
The doctor smiled, but his eyes in their little lymph-lined hammocks did not smile.

He said, “Sometimes, my friend, the scorpion sting has a curious effect. There will be apparent
improvement, and then without warning-pouf!" He pursed his lips and made a little explosion to
show how quick it could be, and he shifted his small black doctor's bag about so that the light of
the lamp fell upon it, for he knew that Kino’s race love the tools of any craft and trust them.
"Sometimes," the doctor went on in a liquid tone, “sometimes there will be a withered leg or a
blind eye or a crumpled back. Oh, | know the sting of the scorpion, my friend, and! can cure it.”

Kino felt the rage and hatred melting toward fear. He did not know, and perhaps this doctor did.
And he could not take the chance of putting his certain ignorance against this man’s possible
knowledge. He was trapped as his people were always trapped, and would be until, as he had
said, they could be sure that the things in the books were really in the books. He could not take a
chance- not with the life or with the straightness of Coyotito. He stood aside and let the doctor
and his man enter the brush hut.

Juana stood up from the fire and backed away as he entered, and she covered the baby’s face with
the fringe of her shawl. And when the doctor went to her and held out his hand, she clutched the
baby tight and looked at Kino where he stood with the fire shadows leaping on his face.

Kino nodded, and only then did she let the doctor take the baby.

"Hold the light,” the doctor said, and when the servant held the lantern high, the doctor looked
for amoment at the wound on the baby’s shoulder. He was thoughtful for a moment and then he
rolled back the baby’s eyelid and looked at the eyeball. He nodded his head while
Coyotito struggled against him.

"It is as | thought,” he said. “The poison has gone inward and it will strike soon. Come look!" He
held the eyelid down. “See- it is blue.”

And Kino, looking anxiously, saw that indeed it was a little blue. And he didn’t know whether or
not it was always a little blue. But the trap was set. He couldn't take the chance.

The doctor's eyes watered in their little hammocks. “! will give him something to try to turn the
poison aside,” he said. And he handed the baby to Kino.

Then from his bag he took a little bottle of white powder and a capsule of gelatine. He filled the
capsule with the powder and closed it, and then around the first capsule he fitted a second
capsule and closed it.

Then he worked very deftly. He took the baby and pinched its lower lip until it opened its mouth.

His fat fingers placed the capsule far back on the baby’s tongue, back of the point where he could
spit it out, and then from the floor he picked up the little pitcher of pulque and gave Coyotito a

162

--- PAGE 163 ---
Unit 15: The Pearl

drink, and it was done. He looked again at the baby's eyeball and he pursed his lips and seemed to
think.
At last he handed the baby back to Juana, and he turned to Kino. "I think the poison will attack
within the hour,” he said. “The medicine may save the baby from hurt, but | will come back in an
hour. Perhaps | am in time to save him.” He took a deep breath and went out of the hut, and his
servant followed him with the lantern.
Now Juana had the baby under her shawl, and she stared at it with anxiety and fear. Kino came to
her, and he lifted the shawl and stared at the baby. He moved his hand to look under the eyelid,
and only then saw that the pearl was still in his hand. Then he went to a box by the wall, and from
it he brought a piece of rag. He wrapped the pearl in the rag, then went to the corner of the brush
house and dug a little hole with his fingers in the dirt floor, and he put the pearl in the hole and
covered it up and concealed the place. And then he went to the fire where Juana was MPEG,
watching the baby’s face.
The doctor, back in his house, settled into his chair and looked at his watch. His people brought
him a little supper of chocolate and sweet cakes and fruit, and he stared at the food
discontentedly.

| In the houses of the neighbors the subject that would lead all conversations for a long time to
come was aired for the first time to see how it would go. The neighbors showed one another with
their thumbs how big the pearl was, and they made little caressing gestures to show
how lovely it was. From now on they would watch Kino and Juana very closely to see whether
riches turned their heads, as riches turn all people's heads. Everyr:1e knew why the doctor had
come. He was not good at dissembling and he was very well unders.ood.

Out in the estuary a tight-woven school of small fishes gliice:ed and broke water to escape a
school of great fishes that drove in to eat them. And in the houses the people could hear the swish
of the small ones and the bouncing splash of the great: ones as the slaughter went
: on. The dampness arose out of the Gulf and was ¢@posited on bushes and cacti and on little trees
in salty drops. And the night mice crept about on the ground and the little night hawks hunted
them silently.

The skinny black puppy with flame spots over his eyes came to Kino's door and looked in. He nearly
shook his hind quarters loose when Kino glanced up at him, and he subsided when Kino looked
away. The puppy did not enter the house, but he watched with frantic interest while Kino ate his
beans from the little pottery dish and wiped it clean with a corncake and ate the cake and washed
the whole down with a drink of pulque.

Kino was finished and was rolling a cigarette when Juana spoke sharply.

"Kino." He glanced at her and then got up and went quickly to her for he saw fright in her eyes. He
stood over her, looking down, but the light was very dim. He kicked a pile of twigs into the fire hole
to make a blaze, and then he could see the face of Coyotito.

The baby’s face was flushed and his throat was working and a little thick drool of saliva issued

from his lips. The spasm of the stomach muscles began, and the baby was very sick.

Kino knelt beside his wife. “So the doctor knew,” he said, but he said it for himself as well as for his
wife, for his mind was hard and suspicious and he was remembering the white powder. Juana

rocked from side to side and moaned out the little Song of the Family as though it
could ward off the danger, and the baby vomited and writhed in her arms. Now uncertainty was in

163

--- PAGE 164 ---
Kino, and the music of evil throbbed in his head and nearly drove out Juana’s song.

The doctor finished his chocolate and nibbled the little fallen pieces of sweet cake. He brushed
his fingers on a napkin, looked at his watch, arose, and took up his little bag.

The news of the baby’s illness traveled quickly among the brush houses, for sickness is second only
to hunger as the enemy of poor people. And some said softly, “Luck, you see, brings bitter friends.”
And they nodded and got up to go to Kino’s house. The neighbors scuttled with
covered noses through the dark until they crowded into Kino’s house again. They stood and gazed,
and they made little comments on the sadness that this should happen at a time of joy, and they
said, “All things are in God's hands.” The old women squatted down beside Juana to try to give her
aid if they could and comfort if they could not.

Then the doctor hurried in, followed by his man. He scattered the old women like chickens.

He took the baby and examined it and felt its head. “The poison it has worked,” he said. “I think I
can defeat it. | will try my best.” He asked for water, and in the cup of it he put
three drops of ammonia, and he pried open the baby’s mouth and poured it down. The baby
spluttered and screeched under the treatment, and Juana watched him with haunted eyes. The
doctor spoke a little as he worked. “It is lucky that | know about the poison of the scorpion,
otherwise-" and he shrugged to show what could have happened.

But Kino was suspicious, and he could not take his eyes from the doctor's open bag, and from the
bottle of white powder there. Gradually the spasms subsided and the baby relaxed under the
doctor's hands. And then Coyotito sighed deeply and went to sleep, for he was very tired
with vomiting.

The doctor put the baby in Juana’s arms. “He will get well now,” he said. "| have won the fight.” And
Juana looked at him with adoration.

The doctor was closing his bag now. He said, “When do you think you can pay this bill?" He said it
even kindly.

“When I have sold my pearl | will pay you,” Kino said.
“You have a pearl? A good pearl?" the doctor asked with interest.

And then the chorus of the neighbors broke in. “He has found the Pearl of the World,” they cried,
and they joined forefinger with thumb to show how great the pearl was.

"Kino will be a rich man," they clamored. “It is a pearl such as one has never seen.”

The doctor looked surprised. "| had not heard of it. Do you keep this pearlin a safe place?
Perhaps you would like me to put it in my safe?”

Kino’s eyes were hooded now, his cheeks were drawn taut. “I have it secure,” he said.
“Tomorrow | will sell it and then | will pay you.”

The doctor shrugged, and his wet eyes never left Kino’s eyes. He knew the pearl would be buried
in the house, and he thought Kino might look toward the place where it was buried. “It would be a
shame to have it stolen before you could sell it,” the doctor said, and he saw Kino's eyes flick
involuntarily to the floor near the side post of the brush house.

When the doctor had gone and all the neighbors had reluctantly returned to their houses, Kino

squatted beside the little glowing coals in the fire hole and listened to the night sound, the soft
sweep of the little waves on the shore and the distant barking of dogs, the creeping of the breeze

164

--- PAGE 165 ---
through the brush house roof and the soft speech of his neighbors in their houses in the village. For
these people do not sleep soundly all night; they awaken at intervals and talk a little and then go
to sleep again. And after a while Kino got up and went to the door of his house.

He smelled the breeze and he listened for any foreign sound of secrecy or creeping, and his eyes
searched the darkness, for the music of evil was sounding in his head and he was fierce and afraid.
After he had probed the night with his senses he went to the place by the side post where the
pearl was buried, and he dug it up and brought it to his sleeping mat, and under his sleeping mat
he dug another little hole in the dirt floor and buried his pearl and covered it up again.

And Juana, sitting by the fire hole, watched him with questioning eyes, and when he had buried
his pearl she asked, “Who do you fear?"

Kino searched for a true answer, and at last he said, “Everyone.” And he could feel a shell of
hardness drawing over him.

After a while they lay down together on the sleeping mat, and Juana did not put the baby in his
box tonight, but cradled him on her arms and covered his face with her head shawl. And the last
light went out of the embers in the fire hole.

But Kino's brain burned, even during his sleep, and he dreamed that Coyotito could read, that one
of his own people could tell him the truth of things. And in his dream, Coyotito was reading from a
book as large as a house, with letters as big as dogs, and the words galloped
and played on the book. And then darkness spread over the page, and with the darkness came the
music of evil again, and Kino stirred in his steep; and when he stirred, Juana’s eyes opened in the
darkness. And then Kino awakened, with the evil music pulsing in him, and he lay in the darkness
with his ears alert.

Then from the corner of the house came a sound so soft that it might have been simply a thought,
a little furtive movement, a touch of a foot on earth, the almost inaudible purr of controlled
breathing. Kino held his breath to listen, and he knew that whatever dark thing was in his house
was holding its breath too, to listen. For a time no sound at all came from the corner of the brush
house. Then Kino might have thought he had imagined the sound. But Juana's hand came creeping
over to him in warning, and then the sound came again! the whisper of a foot on dry earth and the
scratch of fingers in the soil.

And now a wild fear surged in Kino's breast, and on the fear came rage, as it always did. Kino's
hand crept into his breast where his knife hung on a string, and then he sprang like an angry cat,
leaped striking and spitting for the dark thing he knew was in the corner of the house.

He felt cloth, struck at it with his knife and missed, and struck again and felt his knife go through
cloth, and then his head crashed with lightning and exploded with pain. There was a soft scurry in
the doorway, and running steps for amoment, and then silence.

Kino could feel warm blood running down from his forehead, and he could hear Juana calling to
him. “Kino! Kino!" And there was terror in her voice. Then coldness came over him as quickly as the
rage had, and he said, “| am all right. The thing has gone.”

He groped his way back to the sleeping mat. Already Juana was working at the fire. She uncovered
an ember from the ashes and shredded Little pieces of cornhusk over it and blew a little flame into
the cornhusks so that a tiny light danced through the hut. And then from a secret place Juana
brought a little piece of consecrated candle and lighted it at the flame and set it upright on a
fireplace stone. She worked quickly, crooning as she moved about. She dipped the end of her head

TE TT ee ae EE
165

--- PAGE 166 ---
shawl in water and swabbed the blood from Kino’s bruised forehead. “It is nothing,” Kino said, but
his eyes and his voice were hard and cold and a brooding hate was growing in him.

Now the tension which had been growing in Juana boiled up to the surface and her lips were thin.
"This thing is evil," she cried harshly. “This pearl is like a sin! It will destroy us,” and her voice rose
shrilly. “Throw it away, Kino. Let us break it between stones. Let us bury it and forget the place.
Let us throw it back into the sea. It has brought evil. Kino, my husband, it will destroy us.” And in
the firelight her lips and her eyes were alive with her fear.

But Kino’s face was set, and his mind and his will were set. “This is our one chance,” he said. “Our
son must go to school. He must break out of the pot that holds us in.”

"It will destroy us all,” Juana cried. “Even our son.”

“Hush,” said Kino. “Do not speak any more. In the morning we will sell the pearl, and then the evil
will be gone, and only the good remain. Now hush, my wife.” His dark eyes scowled into the little
fire, and for the first time he knew that his knife was still in his hands, and he
raised the blade and looked at it and saw a little line of blood on the steel. For a moment he
seemed about to wipe the blade on his trousers but then he plunged the knife into the earth and so
cleansed it.

The distant roosters began to crow and the air changed and the dawn was coming. The wind of the
morning ruffled the water of the estuary and whispered through the mangroves, and the little
waves beat on the rubbly beach with an increased tempo. Kino raised the sleeping mat and dug up
his pearl and put it in front of him and stared at it.

And the beauty of the pearl, winking and glimmering in the light of the little candle, cozened his
brain with its beauty. So lovely it was, so soft, and its own music came from it- its music of promise
and delight, its guarantee of the future, of comfort, of security. Its warm lucence
promised a poultice against illness and a wall against insult. It closed a door on hunger. And as he
stared at it Kino’s eyes softened and his face relaxed. He could see the little image of the
consecrated candle reflected in the soft surface of the pearl, and he heard again in his ears the
lovely music of the undersea, the tone of the diffused green light of the sea bottom. Juana,
glancing secretly at him, saw him smile. And because they were in some way one thing and one
purpose, she smiled with him.

And they began this day with hope.

Chapter 4

It is wonderful the way a little town keeps track of itself and of all its units. If every single man and
woman, child and baby, acts and conducts itself in a known pattern and breaks no walls and differs
with no one and experiments in no way and is not sick and does not endanger
the ease and peace of mind or steady unbroken flow of the town, then that unit can disappear and
never be heard of. But let one man step out of the regular thought or the known and trusted
pattern, and the nerves of the townspeople ring with nervousness and communication travels
over the nerve lines of the town. Then every unit communicates to the whole.
Thus, in La Paz, it was known in the early morning through the whole town that Kino was going to
sell his pearl that day. It was known among the neighbors in the brush huts, among the pearl
fishermen; it was known among the Chinese grocery-store owners; it was known in the church, for
the altar boys whispered about it. Word of it crept in among the nuns; the beggars in front of the

166

--- PAGE 167 ---
eee el

_—— ————————s ee
.

church spoke of it, for they would be there to take the tithe of the first fruits of the luck.
The little boys knew about it with excitement, but most of all the pearl buyers knew about it, and
when the day had come, in the offices of the pearl buyers, each man sat alone with his little black
velvet tray, and each man rolled the pearls about with his fingertips and considered his part in the
picture.

It was supposed that the pearl buyers were individuals acting alone, bidding against one another
for the pearls the fishermen brought in. And once it had been so. But this was a wasteful method,
for often, in the excitement of bidding for a fine pearl, too great a price had been paid to the
fishermen. This was extravagant and not to be countenanced.

Now there was only one pearl buyer with many hands, and the men who sat in their offices and
waited for Kino knew what price they would offer, how high they would bid, and what method
each one would use. And although these men would not profit beyond their salaries, there was
excitement among the pearl buyers, for there was excitement in the hunt, and if it be a man's
function to break down a price, then he must take joy and satisfaction in breaking it as far down as
possible. For every man in the world functions to the best of his ability, and no one does less than
his best, no matter what he may think about it. Quite apart from any reward they might get, from
any word of praise, from any promotion, a pearl buyer was a pearl buyer, and the best and
happiest pearl buyer was he who bought for the lowest prices.

The sun was hot yellow that morning, and it drew the moisture from the estuary and from the Gulf
and hung it in shimmering scarves in the air so that the air vibrated and vision was insubstantial. A
vision hung in the air to the north of the city- the vision of a mountain that was over two hundred
miles away, and the high slopes of this mountain were swaddled with pines and a great stone peak
arose above the timber line.

And the morning of this day the canoes lay lined up.on the beach; the fishermen did not go out to
dive for pearls, for there would be too much happening, too many things to see, when Kino went
to sell the great pearl.

In the brush houses by the shore Kino’s neighbors sat long over their breakfasts, and they spoke of
what they would do if they had found the pearl. And one man said that he would give it as a
present to the Holy Father in Rome. Another said that he would buy Masses for the souls of his
family for a thousand years. Another thought he might take the money and distribute it among the
poor of La Paz; and a fourth thought of all the good things one could do with the money from the
pearl, of all the charities, benefits, of all the rescues one could perform if one had money. All of
the neighbors hoped that sudden wealth would not turn Kino’s head, would not make a rich man of
him, would not graft onto him the evil limbs of greed and hatred and coldness. For Kino was a
well-liked man; it would be a shame if the pearl destroyed him. “That good wife Juana,” they said,
“and the beautiful baby Coyotito, and the others to come. What a pity it would be if the pearl
should destroy them all.”

For Kino and Juana this was the morning of mornings of their lives, comparable only to the day
when the baby had been born. This was to be the day from which all other days would take their
arrangement. Thus they would say, “It was two years before we sold the pearl,” or, “It was six
weeks after we sold the pearl.” Juana, considering the matter, threw caution to the winds, and
she dressed Coyotito in the clothes she had prepared for his baptism, when there would be money
for his baptism. And Juana combed and braided her hair and tied the ends with two little bows of
red ribbon, caene sie on _ pe skirt and waist. The sun was aaorbin oe when they were

167

--- PAGE 168 ---
For tomorrow, or even this afternoon, he would have new clothes.

The neighbors, watching Kino's door through the crevices in their brush houses, were dressed and
ready too. There was no self-consciousness about their joining Kino and Juana to go pearl selling.
It was expected, it was an historic moment, they would be crazy if they didn't go. It would be
almost a sign of unfriendship.

Juana put on her head shawl carefully, and she draped one long end under her right elbow and
gathered it with her right hand so that a hammock hung under her arm, and in this little hammock
she placed Coyotito, propped up against the head shawl so that he could see
everything and perhaps remember. Kino put on his large straw hat and felt it with his hand to see
that it was properly placed, not on the back or side of his head, like a rash, unmarried,
irresponsible man, and not flat as an elder would wear it, but tilted a little forward to show
aggressiveness and seriousness and vigor. There is a great deal to be seen in the tilt of ahat ona
man. Kino slipped his feet into his sandals and pulled the thongs up over his heels. The great pearl
was wrapped in an old soft piece of deerskin and placed in a little leather bag, and the leather bag
was in a pocket in Kino's shirt. He folded his blanket carefully and draped it in a narrow strip over
his left shoulder, and now they were ready.

Kino stepped with dignity out of the house, and Juana followed him, carrying Coyotito. And as
they marched up the freshet-washed alley toward the town, the neighbors joined them. The
houses belched people; the doorways spewed out children. But because of the seriousness of the
occasion, only one man walked with Kino, and that was his brother, Juan Tomas.

Juan Tomas cautioned his brother. "You must be careful to see they do not cheat you,” he said.

And, "Very careful,” Kino agreed.

"We do not know what prices are paid in other places,” said Juan Tomas.

“How can we know what is a fair price, if we do not know what the pearl buyer gets for the
pearl in another place.”

"That is true,” said Kino, "but how can We know? We are here, we are not there.”

As they walked up toward the city the crowd grew behind them, and Juan Tomas, in pure
nervousness, went on speaking. :

“Before you were born, Kino,” he said, "the old ones thought of a way to get more money for their
pearls. They thought it would be better if they had an agent who took all the pearls to the capital
and sold them there and kept only his share of the profit.”

Kino nodded his head. "| know," he said. "It was a good thought.”

“And so they got such a man,” said Juan Tomas, “and they pooled the pearls, and they started him
off. And he was never heard of again and the pearls were lost. Then they got another man, and
they started him off, and he was never heard of again. And so they gave the whole thing up and
went back to the old way.”

"| know,” said Kino. "| have heard our father tell of it. It was a good idea, butt it was against religion,
and the Father made that very clear.

The loss of the pearl was a punishment visited on those who tried to leave their station. And the
Father made it clear that each man and woman is like a soldier sent by God to guard some part of
the castle of the Universe. And some are in the ramparts and some far deep in the darkness of the
walls. But each one must remain faithful to his post and must not go runnirig about, else the castle
is jn danger from the assaults of Hell,"

168

--- PAGE 169 ---
“| have heard him make that sermon,” said Juan Tomas. “He makes it every year.”

The brothers, as they walked along, squinted their eyes a little, as they and their grandfathers
and their great-grandfathers had done for four hundred years, since first the strangers came with
argument and authority and gunpowder to back up both. And in the four hundred years Kino's
people had learned only one defense- a slight slitting of the eyes and a slight tightening of the lips
and a retirement. Nothing could break down this wall, and they could remain whole within the
wall.

The gathering procession was solemn, for they sensed the importance of this day, and any
children who showed a tendency to scuffle, to scream, to cry out, to steal hats and rumple hair,
were hissed to silence by their elders. So important was this day that an old man came to see,
riding on the stalwart shoulders of his nephew. The procession left the brush huts and entered the
stone and plaster city where the streets were a little wider and there were narrow pavements
beside the building. And as before, the beggars joined them as they passed the church; the
grocers looked out at them as they went by; the little saloons lost their customers and the owners
closed up shop and went along. And the sun beat down on the streets of the city and even tiny
stones threw shadows on the ground.

The news of the approach of the procession ran ahead of it, and in their little dark offices the
pearl buyers stiffened and grew alert.

They got out papers so that they could be at work when Kino appeared, and they put their pearls
in the desks, for it is not good to let an inferior pearl be seen beside a beauty. And word of the
loveliness of Kino's pearl had come to them. The pearl buyers’ offices were clustered together in
one narrow street, and they were barred at the windows, and wooden slats cut out the light so
that only a soft gloom entered the offices.

Astout slow man sat in an office waiting. His face was fatherly and benign, and his eyes twinkled
with friendship. He was a caller of good mornings, a ceremonious shaker of hands, a jolly man who
knew all jokes and yet who hovered close to sadness, for in the midst of a laugh he could
remember the deaiii of your‘aunt, and his eyes could become wet with sorrow for your loss. This
morning he had placed a flower in a vase on his desk, a single scarlet hibiscus, and the vase sat
beside the black velvet-lined pearl tray in front of him. He was shaved close to the blue roots of
his beard, and his hands were clean and his nails polished.

His door stood open to the morning, and he hummed under his breath while his right hand
practiced legerdemain. He rolled a coin back and forth over his knuckles and made it appear and
disappear, made it spin and sparkle. The coin winked into sight and as quickly slipped
out of sight, and the man did not even watch his own performance. The fingers did it all
mechanically, precisely, while the man hummed to himself and peered out the door. Then he
heard the tramp of feet of the approaching crowd, and the fingers of his right hand worked faster
and faster until, as the figure of Kino filled the doorway, the coin flashed and disappeared.

“Good morning, my friend,” the stout man said, "What can | do for you?"

Kino stared into the dimness of the little office, for his eyes were squeezed from the outside glare.

But the buyer's eyes had become as steady and cruel and unwinking as a hawk's eyes, while the

rest of his face smiled in greeting. And secretly, behind his desk, his right hand

practiced with the coin.

"| have a pearl,” said Kino. And Juan Tomas stood beside him and snorted a little at the

understatement. The neighbors peered around the doorway, and a line of little boys clambered
i

169

--- PAGE 170 ---
on the window bars and looked through. Several little boys, on their hands and knees, watched
‘the scene around Kino’s legs.

“You have a pearl,” the dealer said. “Sometimes a man brings in a dozen. Well, let us see your
pearl. We will value it and give you the best price.” And his fingers worked furiously with the coin.

Now Kino instinctively knew his own dramatic effects. Slowly he brought out the leather bag,
slowly took from it the soft and dirty piece of deerskin, and then he let the great pearl roll into the
black velvet tray, and instantly his eyes went to the buyer's face. But there was no
sign, no movement, the face did not change, but the secret hand behind the desk missed in its
precision. The coin stumbled over a knuckle and slipped silently into the dealer's lap. And the
fingers behind the desk curled into a fist. When the right hand came out of hiding, the
forefinger touched the great pearl, rolled it on the black velvet; thumb and forefinger picked it up
and brought it near to the dealer's eyes and twirled it in the air.

Kino held his breath, and the neighbors held their breath, and the whispering went back through
the crowd. “He is inspecting it- No price has been mentioned yet- They have not come toa price.”
Now the dealer's hand had become a personality. The hand tossed the great pearl back in the tray,
the forefinger poked and insulted it, and on the dealer's face there came a sad and contemptuous
smile.

“lam sorry, my friend, said, and his shoulders rose a little to indicate that the misfortune was
no fault of his.

“It is a pearl of great vai. -,” Kino said.

The dealer's fingers ae the pearl so that it bounced and rebound softly from the side of the
velvet tray.

“You have heard of fool's gold,” the dealer said. “This pear! is like fool's gold. It is too large. Who

would buy it? There is no market for such things. It is a curiosity only. | am sorry. You thought it was
a thing of value, and it is only a curiosity.”

Now Kino's face was perplexed and worried. “It is the Pearl of the World,” he cried. "No one has
ever seen such a pearl.”

"On the contrary,” said the dealer, “it is large and clumsy. As a curiosity it has interest; some
museum might perhaps take it to place in a collection of seashells. | can give you, say, a thousand
pesos.”

Kino's face grew dark and dangerous. “It is worth fifty thousand,” he said. "You know it. You want to
cheat me.”

And the dealer heard a little grumble go through the crowd as they heard his price. And the dealer
felt a little tremor of fear.

"Do not blame me,” he said quickly. “| am only an appraiser. Ask the others. Go to their offices
and show your pearl- or better, let them come here, so that you can see there is no collusion.
Boy,” he called.

And when his servant looked through the rear door, “Boy, go to such a one, and such another one
and such a third one. Ask them to step in here and do not tell them why. Just say that | will be

pleased to see them.” And his right hand went behind the desk and pulled another coin from his
pocket, and the coin rolled back and forth over the knuckles.

Kino's neighbors whispered together. They had been afraid of something like this. The pearl was
SL LD

170

--- PAGE 171 ---
large, but it had a strange color. They had been suspicious of it from the first. And after all, a
thousand pesos was not to be thrown away. It was comparative wealth to a man who was not
wealthy. And suppose Kino took a thousand pesos. Only yesterday he had nothing.

But Kino had grown tight and hard. He felt the creeping of fate, the circling of wolves, the hover
of vultures. He felt the evil coagulating about him, and he was helpless to protect himself. He
heard in his ears the evil music. And on the black velvet the great pearl glistened, so that the
dealer could not keep his eyes from it.

The crowd in the doorway wavered and broke and let the three pearl dealers through. The crowd
was silent now, fearing to miss a word, to fail to see a gesture or an expression. Kino was silent and
watchful.

He felt a little tugging at his back, and he turned and looked in Juana’s eyes, and when he looked
away he had renewed strength.

The dealers did not glance at one another nor at the pear|. The man behind the desk said, “| have
put a value on this pearl. The owner here does not think it fair. | will ask you to examine this- this
thing and make an offer. Notice,” he said to Kino, “I have not mentioned what |
have offered.”

The first dealer, dry and stringy, seemed now to see the pearl for the first time. He took it up,
rolled it quickly between thumb and forefinger, and then cast it contemptuously back into the
tray. “Do not include me in the discussion,” he said dryly. "| will make no offer at all. | do not want
it. This is not a pearl- it is a monstrosity.” His thin lips curled. .
Now the second dealer, a little man with a shy soft voice, took up the pearl, and he examined it
carefully. He took a glass from his pocket and inspected it under magnification. Then he laughed
softly.

“Better pearl are made of paste," he said. "| know these things. This is soft and chalky, it will lose
its color and die in a few months.

Look-" He offered t..e glass to Kino, showed him how to use it, and Kino, who had never seen a
pearl's surface magnified, was shocked at the strange-looking surface.

The third dealer took the pearl from Kino's hands. “One of my clients likes such things,” he said. "I
will offer five hundred pesos, and perhaps |! can sell it to my client for six hundred.”

Kino reached quickly and snatched the pearl from his hand. He wrapped it in the deerskin and

thrust it inside his shirt.

The man behind the desk said, "I'm a fool, | know, but my first offer stands. ! still offer one
thousand. What are you doing?" he asked, as Kino thrust the pear! out of sight.

“| am cheated," Kino cried fiercely. "My pearl is not for sale here. | will go, perhaps even to the
capital.”

Now the dealers glanced quickly at one another. They knew they had played too hard; they knew
they would be disciplined for their failure, and the man at the desk said quickly, “I might go to

fifteen hundred.” But Kino was pushing his way through the crowd. The hum of talk came to him

dimly, his rage blood pounded in his ears, and he burst through and strode away. Juana followed,

trotting after him.

When the evening came, the neighbors in the brush houses sat eating their corncakes and beans,

and they discussed the great theme of the morning. They did not know, it seemed a fine pearl to

them, but they had never seen such a pearl before, and surely the dealers knew more about the

171

--- PAGE 172 ---
value of pearls than they. “And mark this,” they said. “Those dealers did not discuss these things.
Each of the three knew the pearl was valueless.”

“But suppose they had arranged it before?"
"If that is so, then all of us have been cheated all of our lives.”

Perhaps, some argued, perhaps it would have been better if Kino took the one thousand five
hundred pesos. That is a great deal of money, more than he has ever seen. Maybe Kino is a fool.

Suppose he should really go to the capital and find no buyer for his pearl. He would never live that
down.

And now, said other fearful ones, now that he had defied them, those buyers will not want to deal
with him at all. Maybe Kino has cut off his own head and destroyed himself.

And others said, Kino is a brave man, and a fierce man; he is right.
From his courage we may all profit. These were proud of Kino.

In his house Kino squatted on his sleeping mat, brooding. He had buried his pearl under a stone of
the fire hole in his house, and he stared at the woven tules of his sleeping mat until the crossed
design danced in his head. He had lost one world and had not gained another. And Kino was afraid.
Never in his life had he been far from home. He was afraid of strangers and of strange places. He
was terrified of that monster of strangeness they called the capital. It lay over the water and
through the mountains, over a thousand miles, and every strange terrible mile was frightening.
But Kino had lost his old world and he must clamber on to a new one. For his dream of the future
was real and never to be destroyed, and he had said "I will go,” and that made a real thing too.

To determine to go and to say it was to be halfway there.

Juana watched him while he buried his pearl, and she watched him while she cleaned Coyotito
and nursed him, and Juana made the corncakes for supper.

Juan Tomas came in and squatted down beside Kino and remained silent for a long time, until
at last Kino demanded, "What else could | do?

They are cheats.”
Juan Tomas nodded gravely. He was the elder, and Kino looked to him for wisdom. “It is hard to
know," he said. "We do know that we are cheated from birth to the overcharge on our coffins. But

we survive. You have defied not the pearl buyers, but the whole structure, the whole way of life,
and | am afraid for you.”

“What have | to fear but starvation?” Kino asked.

But Juan Tomas shook his head slowly. "That we must all fear. But suppose you are correct-
suppose your pearl is of great value- do you think then the game is over?"

"What do you mean?”

"| don't know,” said Juan Tomas, “but | am afraid for you. It is new ground you are walking on,
you do not know the way."

"| will go. | will go soon,” said Kino.

“Yes,” Juan Tomas agreed. "That you must do. But | wonder if you will find it any different in the
capital. Here, you have friends and me, your brother. There, you will have no one.”

“What can | do?” Kino cried. "Some deep outrage is here. My son must have a chance. That is what
they are striking at. My friends will protect me.”

ic cmthanmnateiescmnen tated attend

172

--- PAGE 173 ---
"Only so long as they are not in danger or discomfort from it,” said Juan Tomas. He arose, saying,
“Go with God,"
And Kino said, “Go with God,” and did not even look up, for the words had a strange chillin them.

Long after Juan Tomas had gone Kino sat brooding on his sleeping mat. A lethargy had settled on
him, and a little gray hopelessness. Every road seemed blocked against him. In his head he heard
only the dark music of the enemy. His senses were burningly alive, but his mind went back to the
deep participation with all things, the gift he had from his people. He heard every little sound of
the gathering night, the sleepy complaint of settling birds, the love agony of cats, the strike and
withdrawal of little waves on the beach, and the simple hiss of distance.

And he could smell the sharp odor of exposed kelp from the receding tide. The little flare of the
twig fire made the design on his steeping mat jump before his entranced eyes.

Juana watched him with worry, but she knew him and she knew she could help him best by being
silent and by being near. And as though she too could hear the Song of Evil, she fought it, singing
softly the melody of the family, of the safety and warmth and wholeness of the family.

She held Coyotito in her arms and sang the song to him, to keep the evil out, and her voice was
brave against the threat of the dark music.

Kino did not move nor ask for his supper. She knew he would ask when he wanted it. His eyes were
entranced, and he could sense the wary, watchful evil outside the brush house; he could feel the
dark creeping things waiting for him to go out into the night. It was shadowy and
dreadful, and yet it called to him and threatened him and challenged him. His right hand went
into his shirt and felt his knife; his eyes were wide; he stood up and walked to the doorway.

Juana willed to stop him; she raised her hand to stop him, and her mouth opened with terror. Fora
long moment Kino looked out into the darkness and then he stepped outside, Juana heard the
little rush, the grunting struggle, the blow. She froze with terror for a moment, and
then her lips drew back from her teeth like a cat's lips. She set Coyotito down on the ground. She
seized a stone from the fireplace and rushed outside, but it was over by then. Kino lay on the
ground, struggling to rise, and there was no one near him. Only the shadows and the strike and
rush of waves and the hiss of distance. But the evil was all about, hidden behind the brush fence,
crouched beside the house in the shadow, hovering in the air.

Juana dropped her stone, and she put her arms around Kino and helped him to his feet and
supported him into the house. Blood oozed down from his scalp and there was a long deep cut in
his cheek from ear to chin, a deep, bleeding slash. And Kino was only half conscious. He shook his
head from side to side. His shirt was torn open and his clothes half pulled off. Juana sat him down
on his sleeping mat and she wiped the thickening blood from his face with her skirt. She brought
him pulque to drink in a little pitcher, and still he shook his head to clear out the darkness.

"Who?" Juana asked.

"| don't know,” Kino said. “I didn't see.”

Now Juana brought her clay pot of water and she washed the cut on his-face while he stared dazed
ahead of him.

“Kino, my husband,” she cried, and his eyes stared past her. “Kino, can you hear me?"

"| hear you,” he said dully.

“Kino, this pearl is evil. Let us destroy it before it destroys us. Let us crush it between two stones.
Let us- let us throw it back in the sea where it belongs. Kino, it is evil, itis evil!”

EL
173

--- PAGE 174 ---
And as she spoke the light came back in Kino’s eyes so that they glowed fiercely and his muscles
hardened and his will hardened.

“No,” he said. “I will fight this thing. | will win over it. We will have our chance.” His fist pounded
the sleeping mat. "No one shall take our good fortune from us,” he said. His eyes softened then and
he raised a gentle hand to Juana’s shoulder. “Believe me,” he said. "| am a man.” And his face grew
crafty.

“In the morning we will take our canoe and we will go over the sea and over the mountains to
the capital, you and I. We will not be cheated. | am a man.”

“Kino,” she said huskily, “| am afraid. A man can be killed. Let us throw the pearl back into the

sea.

“Hush,” he said fiercely. “I am a man. Hush.” And she was silent, for his voice was command.

“Let us sleep a little," he said. “In the first light we will start. You are not afraid to go with
me?"

“No, my husband.”

His eyes were soft and warm on her then, his hand touched her cheek.
“Let us sleep a little,” he said.

Chapter 5

The late moon arose before the first rooster crowed. Kino opened his eyes in the darkness, for he
sensed movement near him, but he did not move. Only his eyes searched the darkness, and in the
pale light of the moon that crept through the holes in the brush house Kino saw Juana
arise silently from beside him. He saw her move toward the fireplace.

So carefully did she work that he heard only the lightest sound when she moved the fireplace
stone. And then like a shadow she glided toward the door. She paused for a moment beside the

hanging box where Coyotito lay, then for a second she was black in the doorway, and then she was
gone.

And rage surged in Kino. He rolled up to his feet and followed her as silently as she had gone, and
he could hear her quick footsteps going toward the shore. Quietly he tracked her, and his brain
was red with anger. She burst clear out of the brush line and stumbled over the little boulders
toward the water, and then she heard him coming and she broke into a run. Her arm was up to
throw when he leaped at her and caught her arm and wrenched the pearl from her. He struck her
in the face with his clenched fist and she fell among the boulders, and he kicked her in the side. In

the pale light he could see the little waves break over her, and her skirt floated about and clung to
her legs as the water receded.

Kino looked down at her an@his teeth were bared. He hissed at her like a snake, and Juana stared
at him with wide unfrightened eyes, like a sheep before the butcher. She knew there was murder
in him, and it was all right; she had accepted it, and she would not resist or even
protest. And then the rage left him and a sick disgust took its place.

He turned away from her and walked up the beach and through the brush line. His senses were
dulled by his emotion.

He heard the rush, got his knife out and lunged at one dark figure and felt his knife go home, and
then he was swept to his knees and swept again to the ground. Greedy fingers went through his

174

--- PAGE 175 ---
clothes, frantic fingers searched him, and the pearl, knocked from his hand, lay winking behind a
little stone in the pathway. It glinted in the soft moonlight.

Juana dragged herself up from the rocks on the edge of the water. Her face was a dull pain and her
side ached. She steadied herself on her knees for a while and her wet skirt clung to her. There was
no anger in her for Kino. He had said, “l am a man,” and that meant certain things to Juana. It
meant that he was half insane and half god. It meant that Kino would drive his strength against a
mountain and plunge his strength against the sea. Juana, in her woman's soul, knew that the
mountain would stand while the man broke himself; that the sea would surge while the man
drowned in it. And yet it was this thing that made him a man, half insane and half god, and Juana
had need of aman; she could not live without a man.

Although she might be puzzled by these differences between man and woman, she knew them and
accepted them and needed them. Of course she would follow him, there was no question of that.
Sometimes the quality of woman, the reason, the caution, the sense of preservation, could cut
through Kino’s manness and save them all. She climbed painfully to her feet, and she dipped her
cupped palms in the little waves and washed her bruised face with the stinging salt water, and
then she went creeping up the beach after Kino.

A flight of herring clouds had moved over the sky from the south. The pale moon dipped in and out
of the strands of cloudsso that Juana walked in darkness for a moment and in light the next. Her
back was bent with pain and her head was low. She went through the line of brush when the moon
was covered, and when it looked through she saw the glimmer of the great pearl in the path
behind tiie rock. She sank to her knees and picked it up, and the moon went into the darkness of
the clouds again. Juana remained on her knees while she considered whether to go back to the sea
and finish her job, and as she considered, the light came again, and she saw two dark figures lying
in the path ahead of her. She leaped forward and saw that one was Kino and the other a stranger
with dark shiny fluid leaking from his throat.

Kino moved sluggishly, arms and legs stirred like those of a crushed bug, and a thick muttering
came from his mouth. Now, in an instant, Juana knew that the old life was gone forever. A dead
man in the path and Kino’s knife, dark-bladed beside him, convinced her. All of the time Juana had
been trying to rescue something of the old peace, of the time before the pearl. But now it was
gone, and there was no retrieving it. And knowing this, she abandoned the past instantly. There
was nothing to do but to save themselves.

Her pain was gone now, her slowness. Quickly she dragged the dead.man from the pathway into
the shelter of the brush. She went to Kino and sponged his face with her wet skirt. His senses were
coming back and he moaned.

“They have taken the pearl. | have lost it. Now it is over,” he said.

"The pearl is gone.”

Juana quieted him as she would quiet a sick child. “Hush,” she said.

“Here is your pearl. | found it in the path. Can you hear me now? Here is your pearl. Can you
understand? You have killed a man. We must go away. They will come for us, can you understand?
We must be gone before the daylight comes.”

“| was attacked,” Kino said uneasily. “I struck to save my life."

"Do you remember yesterday?” Juana asked. “Do you think that will matter? Do you remember the
men of the city? Do you think your explanation will help?"

CN UU NEES IIIINIRnIEnRennemnenemnesere eee ee
175

--- PAGE 176 ---
Kino drew a great breath and fought off his weakness. “No,” he said. “You are right.” And his will
hardened and he was a man again.

"Go to our house and bring Coyotito,” he said, “and bring all the corn we have. | will drag the canoe
into the water and we will go.”

He took his knife and left her. He stumbled toward the beach and he came to his canoe. And when
the light broke through again he saw that a great hole had been knocked in the bottom. And a
searing rage came to him and gave him strength. Now the darkness was closing in on his
family; now the evil music filled the night, hung over the mangroves, skirled in the wave beat. The
canoe of his grandfather, plastered over and over, and a splintered hole broken in it. This was an
evil beyond thinking. The killing of a man was not so evil as the killing of a
boat. For a boat does not have sons, and a boat cannot protect itself, and a wounded boat does
not heal. There was sorrow in Kino's rage, but this last thing had tightened him beyond breaking.
He was an animal now, for hiding, for attacking, and he lived only to preserve himself and his
family. He was not conscious of the pain in his head. He leaped up the beach, through the brush
line toward his brush house, and it did not occur to him to take one of the canoes of his neighbors.

Never once did the thought enter his head, any more than he could have conceived breaking a
boat.

The roosters were crowing and the dawn was not far off. Smoke of the first fires seeped out
through the walls of the brush houses, and the first smell of cooking corncakes was in the air.
Already the dawn birds were scampering in the bushes. The weak moon was losing its light and the
clouds thickened and curdled to the southward. The wind blew freshly into the estuary, anervous,

restless wind with the smell of storm on its breath, and there was change and uneasiness in the.
air.

Kino, hurrying toward his house, felt a surge of exhilaration. Now he was not confused, for there

was only one thing to do, and Kino’s hand went first to the great pearl in his shirt and then to his
knife hanging under his shirt.

He saw a little glow ahead of him, and then without interval a tall flame leaped up in the dark with
a crackling roar, and a tall edifice of fire lighted the pathway. Kino broke into a run; it was his
brush house, he knew. And he knew that these houses could burn down in a very
few moments. And as he ran a scuttling figure ran toward him- Juana, with Coyotito in her arms
and Kino's shoulder blanket clutched in her hand. The baby moaned with fright, and Juana’s eyes
were wide and terrified. Kino could see the house was gone, and he did not question Juana. He
knew, but she said, "It was torn up and the floor dug- even the baby’s box turned out, and as |

looked they put the fire to the outside.”

The fierce light of the burning house lighted Kino’s face strongly.
“Who?” he demanded.

"| don't know,” she said. "The dark ones.”

The neighbors were tumbling from their houses now, and they watched the falling sparks and
stamped them out to save their own houses. Suddenly Kino was afraid. The light made him afraid.
He remembered the man lying dead in the brush beside the path, and he took Juana by the arm
and drew her into the shadow of a house away from the light, for light was
danger to him. For a moment he considered and then he worked among the shadows until he came
to the house of Juan Tomas, his brother, and he slipped into the doorway and drew Juana after
him. Outside, he could hear the squeal of children and the shouts of the neighbors, for his friends

176

--- PAGE 177 ---
thought he might be inside the burning house.

The house of Juan Tomas was almost exactly like Kino’s house; nearly all the brush houses were
alike, and all leaked light and air, so that Juana and Kino, sitting in the corner of the brother's
house, could see the leaping flames through the wall. They saw the flames tall and
furious, they saw the roof fall and watched the fire die down as quickly as a twig fire dies. They
heard the cries of warning of their friends, and the shrill, keening cry of Apolonia, wife of Juan
Tomas.

She, being the nearest woman relative, raised a formal lament for the dead of the family.
Apolonia realized that she was wearing her second-best head shawl and she rushed to her
house to get her fine new one. As she rummaged in a box by the wall, Kino's voice said quietly,
“Apolonia, do not cry out.

We are not hurt.”

“How do you come here?” she demanded.

"Do not question,” he said. "Go now to Juan Tomas and bring him here and tell no one else.
This is important to us, Apolonia.”

She paused, her hands helpless in front of her, and then, "Yes, my brother-in-law," she said.

In a few moments Juan Tomas came back with her. He lighted a candle and came to them where
they crouched in a corner and hessaid, “Apolonia, see to the door, and do not let anyone enter.” He
was older, Juan Tomas, and he assumed the authority. "Now, my brother," he said. "I was attacked
in the dark,” said Kino. "And in the fight | have killed a man.”

"Who?" asked Juan Tomas quickly.

“| do not know. It is all darkness- all darkness and shape of darkness.”

"It is the pearl,” said Juan Tomas. “There is a devil in this pearl. You should have sold it and passed
on the devil. Perhaps you can still sell it and buy peace for yourself."

And Kino said, “Oh, my brother, an insult has been put on me that is deeper than my life. For on the
beach my canoe is broken, my house is burned, and in the brush a dead man lies. Every escape is
cut off. You must hide us, my brother.”

And Kino, looking closely, saw deep worry come into his brother's eyes and he forestalled him ina
possible refusal. “Not for long," he said quickly. "Only until a day has passed and the new night has
come. Then we will go.”

"Iwill hide you,” said Juan Tomas.

"| do not want to bring danger to you,” Kino said. “| know | am like a leprosy. | will go tonight and
then you will be safe.” ;

“| will protect you,” said Juan Tomas, and he called, “Apolonia, close up the door. Do not even
whisper that Kino is here.”

They sat silently all day in the darkness of the house, and they could hear the neighbors speaking
of them. Through the walls of the house they could watch their neighbors raking through the
ashes to find the bones. Crouching in the house of Juan Tomas, they heard the shock go into their
neighbors’ minds at the news of the broken boat. Juan Tomas went out among the neighbors to
divert their suspicions, and he gave them theories and ideas of what had happened to Kino and to
Juana and to the baby. To one he said, “I think they have gone south along the coast to escape the

evil that was on them.” And to another, “Kino would never leave the sea. Perhaps he found another

177

--- PAGE 178 ---
boat." And he said, "Apolonia is ill with grief.”

And in that day the wind rose up to beat the Gulf and tore the kelps and weeds that lined the
shore, and the wind cried through the brush houses and no boat was safe on the water. Then Juan
Tomas told among the neighbors, “Kino is gone. If he went to the sea, he is drowned by
now.” And after each trip among the neighbors Juan Tomas came back with something borrowed.
He brought a little woven straw bag of red beans and a gourd full of rice. He borrowed a cup of
dried peppers and a block of salt, and he brought in a long working knife, eighteen inches long and
heavy, as a small ax, a tool and a weapon. And when Kino saw this knife his eyes lighted up, and he
fondled the blade and his thumb tested the edge.

The wind screamed over the Gulf and turned the water white, and the mangroves plunged like ~
frightened cattle, and a fine sandy dust arose from the land and hung in a stifling cloud over the
sea. The wind drove off the clouds and skimmed the sky clean and drifted the sand of the country
like snow.

Then Juan Tomas,: when the evening approached, talked long with his brother. "Where will you
go?”

"To the north,” said Kino. "| have heard that there are cities in the north.”
“Avoid the shore,” said Juan Tomas. "They are making a party to search the shore. The men in the
city will look for you. Do you still have the pearl?”

“| have it,” said Kino. “And | will keep it. | might have given it as a gift, but now it is my misfortune
and my life and | will keep it.” His eyes were hard and cruel and bitter.

Coyotito whimpered and Juana muttered little magics over him to make him silent.
"The wind is good,” said Juan Tomas. "There will be no tracks.”

They left quietly in the dark before the moon had risen. The family stood formally in the house of
Juan Tomas. Juana carried Coyotito on her back, covered and held in by her head shawl, and the
baby slept, cheek turned sideways against her shoulder, The head shawl covered the baby, and
one end of it came across Juana’s nose to protect her from the evil night air. Juan Tomas embraced
his brother with the double embrace and kissed him on both cheeks. "Go with God," he said, and it
was like a death. "You will not give up the pearl?"

"This pearl has become my soul,” said Kino. “If | give it up I shall lose my soul. Go thou also with
God.”

Chapter 6

The wind blew fierce and strong, and it pelted them with bits of sticks, sand, and little rocks.
Juana and Kino gathered their clothing tighter about them and covered their noses and went out
into the world.

The sky was brushed clean by the wind and the stars were cold in a black sky. The two walked
carefully, and they avaided the center of the town where some sleeper in a doorway might see
them pass. For the town closed itself in against the night, and anyone who moved about in the
darkness would be noticeable. Kino threaded his way around the edge of the city and turned
north, north by the stars, and found the rutted sandy road that led through the brushy country
toward Loreto where the miraculous Virgin has her station.

Kino could feel the blown sand against his ankles and he was glad, for he knew there would be no
tracks. The little light from the stars made out for him the narrow road through the brushy

178

--- PAGE 179 ---
country. And Kino could hear the pad of Juana's feet behind him. He went quickly and quietly, and
Juana trotted behind him to keep up.

Some ancient thing stirred in Kino. Through his fear of dark and the devils that haunt the night,
there came a rush of exhilaration; some animal thing was moving in him so that he was cautious
and wary and dangerous; some ancient thing out of the past of his people was alive in him. The
wind was at his back and the stars guided him. The wind cried and whisked in the brush, and the
family went on monotonously, hour after hour. They passed no one and saw no one. At last, to
their right, the waning moon arose, and when it came up the wind died down, and the land was
still. é ;

Now they could see the little road ahead of them, deep cut with sand-drifted wheel tracks. With
the wind gone there would be footprints, but they were a good distance from the town and
perhaps their tracks might not be noticed. Kino walked carefully in a wheel rut, and Juana
followed in his path. One big cart, going to the town in the morning, could wipe out every trace of
their passage.

All night they walked and never changed their pace. Once Coyotito awakened, and Juana shifted
him in front of her and soothed him until he went to sleep again. And the evils of the night were
about them. The coyotes cried and laughed in the brush, and the owls screeched and hissed over
their heads. And once some large animal lumbered away, rackling the undergrowth as .it went. And
Kino gripped the handle of the big working knife and took a sense of protection from it.

The music of the pearl was triumphant in Kino’s head, and the quiet melody of the family underlay
it, and they wove themselves into the soft padding of sandaled feet in the dust. All night they
walked, and in the first dawn Kino searched the roadside for a covert to lie in during the day. He

found his place near to the road, a little clearing where deer might have lain, and it was curtained

thickly with the dry brittle trees that lined the road. And when Juana had seated herself and had

settled to nurse the baby, Kino went back to the road. He broke a branch and carefully swept the

footprints where they had turned from the roadway. And then, in the first light, he heard the

creak of a wagon, and he crouched beside the road and watched a heavy two-wheeled cart go by,

drawn by slouching oxen. And when it had passed out of sight, he went back to the roadway and

looked at the rut and found that the footprints were gone. And again he swept out his traces and

went back to Juana.

She gave him the soft corncakes Apolonia had packed for them, and after a while she slept a little.

But Kino sat on the ground and stared at the earth in front of him. He watched the ants moving, a

little column of them near to his foot, and he put his foot in their path. Then the column climbed

over his instep and continued on its way, and Kino left his foot there and watched them move over
it.

The sun arose hotly. They were not near the Gulf now, and the air was dry and hot so that the brush

cricked with heat and a good resinous smell came from it. And when Juana awakened, when the

sun was high, Kino told her things she knew already.
“Beware of that kind of tree there," he said, pointing. “Do not touch it, for if you do and then touch

your eyes, it will blind you. And beware of the tree that bleeds, See, that one over there. For if

you break it the red blood will flow from it, and it is evil luck.” And she nodded and smiled a little

- athim, for she knew these things.

“Will they follgw us?” she asked. “Do you think they will try to find us?”
“They will try,” said Kino. "Whoever finds us will take the pearl. Oh, they will try.”

179

--- PAGE 180 ---
And Juana said, "Perhaps the dealers were right and the pearl has no value. Perhaps this has
all been an illusion.”

_ Kino reached into his clothes and brought out the pearl. He let the sun play on it until it burned in
his eyes. "No," he said, “they would not have tried to steal it if it had been valueless."

"Do you know who attacked you? Was it the dealers?”
"| do not know,” he said. “! didn’t see them.”

He looked into his peart to find his vision. "When we sell it at last, | will have a rifle,” he said, and
he looked into the shining surface for his rifle, but he saw only a huddled dark body on the ground
with shining blood dripping from its throat. And he said quickly, "We will be married in a great
church.” And in the pearl he saw Juana with her beaten face crawling home through the night.

“Our son must learn to read,” he said frantically. And there in the pearl Coyotito's face, thick and
feverish from the medicine.

And Kino thrust the pearl back into his clothing, and the music of the pearl had become sinister in
his ears, and it was interwoven with the music of evil.

The hot sun beat on the earth so that Kino and Juana moved into the lacy shade of the brush, and
small gray birds scampered on the ground in the shade. In the heat of the day Kino relaxed and
covered his eyes with his hat and wrapped his blanket about his face to keep the flies off, and he
slept.

But Juana did not sleep. She sat quiet as a stone and her face was quiet. Her mouth was still
swollen where Kino had struck her, and big flies buzzed around the cut on her chin. But she sat as
still as a sentinel, and when Coyotito awakened she placed him on the ground in front of her and
watched him wave his arms and kick his feet, and he smiled and gurgled at her until she smiled
too. She picked up a little twig from the ground and tickled him, and she gave him water from the
gourd she carried in her bundle.

Kino stirred in a dream, and he cried out in a guttural voice, and his hand moved in symbolic
fighting. And then he moaned and sat up suddenly, his eyes wide and his nostrils flaring. He
listened and heard only the cricking heat and the hiss of distance.

“What is it?” Juana asked.

“Hush,” he said.

"You were dreaming.”

“Perhaps.” But he was restless, and when she gave him a corncake from her store he paused in his

chewing to listen. He was uneasy and nervous; he glanced over his shoulder; he lifted the big knife
and felt its edge. When Coyotito gurgled on the ground Kino said, "Keep him quiet.”

"What is the matter?” Juana asked.

"| don't know.”

He listened again, an animal light in his eyes. He stood up then, silently; and crouched low, he
threaded his way through the brush toward the road. But he did not step into the road; he crept
into the cover of a thorny tree and peered out along the way he had come. And then he saw them
moving along. His body stiffened and he drew down his head and peeked out from under a fallen
branch. In the distance he could see three figures, two on foot and one on horseback. But he knew
what they were, and a chill of fear went through him, Even in the distance he could see the two on
foot moving slowly along, bent low to the ground. Here, one would pause and look at the earth,

180

--- PAGE 181 ---
while the other joined him. They were the trackers, they could follow the trail of a big horn sheep
in the stone mountains. They were as sensitive as hounds. Here, he and Juana might have stepped
out of the wheel rut, and these people from the inland, these hunters, could follow, could read a
broken straw or a little tumbled pile of dust. Behind them, on a horse, was a dark man, his nose
covered with a blanket, and across his saddle a rifle gleamed in the sun.

Kino lay as rigid as the tree limb. He barely breathed, and his eyes went to the place where he had
swept out the track. Even the sweeping might be a message to the trackers. He knew these inland
hunters. In a country where there was little game they managed to live because of their ability to
hunt, and they were hunting him. They scuttled over the ground like animals and found a sign and
crouched over it while the horseman waited.

The trackers whined a little, like excited dogs on a warming trail.

Kino slowly drew his big knife to his hand and made it ready. He knew what he must do. If the
trackers found the swept place, he must leap for the horseman, kill him quickly and take the rifle.
That was his only chance in the world. And as the three drew nearer on the road, Kino dug little
pits with his sandaled toes so that he could leap without warning, so that his feet would not slip.
He had only a little vision under the fallen limb.

Now Juana, back in her hidden place, heard the pad of the horse's hoofs, and Coyotito gurgled.
She took him up quickly and put him under her shawl and he was silent.

When the trackers came near, Kino could see only their legs and only the legs of the horse from
under the fallen branch. He saw the dark horny feet of the men and their ragged white clothes,
and he heard the creak of leather of the saddle and the clink of spurs. The trackers
stopped at the swept place and studied it, and the horseman stopped.

The horse flung his head up against the bit and the bit-roller clicked under his tongue and the
horse snorted. Then the dark trackers turned and studied the horse and watched his ears.

Kino was not breathing, but his back arched a little and the muscles of his arms and legs stood out
with tension and a line of sweat formed on his upper lip. For a long moment the trackers bent over
the road, and then they moved on slowly, studying the ground ahead of them, and the horseman
moved after them. The trackers scuttled along, stopping, looking, and hurrying on. They would be
back, Kino knew. They would be circling and searching, peeping, stopping, and they would come
back sooner or later to his covered track.

He slid backward and did not bother to cover his tracks. He could not; too many little signs were
there, too many broken twigs and scuffed places and displaced stones. And there was a panic in
Kino now, a panic of flight. The trackers would find his trail, he knew it. There was no escape,
except in flight. He edged away from the road and went quickly and silently to the hidden place
where Juana was. She looked up at him in question.

“Trackers,” he said. “Come!”

And then a helplessness and a hopelessness swept over him, and his face went black and his eyes
were sad. "Perhaps! should let them take me.”

Instantly Juana was on her feet and her hand lay on his arm. “You have the pearl,” she cried
hoarsely. "Do you think they would take you back alive to say they had stolen it?”

His hand strayed limply to the place where the pearl was hidden under his clothes. "They will find
it,” he said weakly.

“Come,” she said. “Come!”
181

--- PAGE 182 ---
And when he did not respond. "Do you think they would let me live? Do you think they would let the
little one here live?"

Her goading struck into his brain; his lips snarled and his eyes were fierce again. “Come,” he said.
"We will go into the mountains. Maybe we can lose them in the mountains.”

Frantically he gathered the gourds and the little bags that were their property. Kino carried a
bundle in his left hand, but the big knife swung free in his right hand. He parted the brush for
Juana and they hurried to the west, toward the high stone mountains. They trotted quickly
through the tangle of the undergrowth. This was panic flight.

Kino did not try to conceal his passage he trotted, kicking the stones, knocking the telltale leaves
from the little trees. The high sun streamed down on the dry creaking earth so that even the
vegetation ticked in protest. But ahead were the naked granite mountains, rising
out of erosion rubble and standing monolithic against the sky. And Kino ran for the high place, as
nearly all animals do when they are pursued.

This land was waterless, furred with the cacti which could store water and with the great-rooted
brush which could reachdeep into the earth for a little moisture and get along on very little. And
underfoot was not soil but broken rock, split into small cubes, great slabs, but none of it water-
rounded. Little tufts of sad dry grass grew between the stones, grass that had sprouted with one
single rain and headed, dropped its seed, and died. Horned toads watched the family go by and
turned their little pivoting dragon heads. And now and then a great jackrabbit, disturbed in his
shade, bumped away and hid behind the nearest rock. The singing heat lay over this desert
country, and ahead the stone mountains looked cool and welcoming.

And Kino fled. He knew what would happen. Alittle way along the road the trackers would become
aware that they had missed the path, and they would come back, searching and judging, and ina
little while they would find the place where Kino and Juana had rested. From there it would be
easy for them- these little stones, the fallen leaves and the whipped branches, the scuffed places
where a foot had slipped. Kino could see them in his mind, slipping along the track, whining a
little with eagerness, and behind them, dark and half disinterested, the horseman with the rifle.
His work would come last, for he would not take them back. Oh, the music of evil sang loud in
Kino's head now, it sang with the whine of heat and with the dry ringing of snake rattles.

It was not large and overwhelming now, but secret and poisonous, and the pounding of his heart
gave it undertone and rhythm.

The way began to rise, and as it did the rocks grew larger. But now Kino had put a little distance
between his family and the trackers.

Now, on the first rise, he rested. He climbed a great boulder and looked back over the shimmering
country, but he could not see his enemies, not even the tall horseman riding through the brush.
_ Juana had squatted in the shade of the boulder. She raised her bottle of water to Coyotito's lips;
his little dried tongue sucked greedily at it. She looked up at Kino when he came back; she saw
him examine her ankles, cut and scratched from the stones and brush, and she covered them
quickly with her skirt. Then she handed the bottle to him, but he shook his head. Her eyes were
bright in her tired face. Kino moistened his cracked lips with his tongue.

“Juana,” he said, “I will go on and you will hide. | will lead them into the mountains, and when

they have gone past, you will go north to Loreto or to Santa Rosalia. Then, if | can escape
them, | will come to you. It is the only safe way.”

She looked full into his eyes for a moment. “No,” she said. “We go with you.”

182

--- PAGE 183 ---
“| can go faster alone,” he said harshly. "You will put the little one in more danger if you go with

me.
"No," said Juana.
"You must. It is the wise thing and it is my wish,” he said.
"No,” said Juana.

He looked then for weakness in her face, for fear or irresolution, and there was none. Her eyes
were very bright. He shrugged his shoulders helplessly then, but he had taken strength from her.
When they moved on it was no longer panic flight.

The country, as it rose toward the mountains, changed rapidly. Now there were long outcroppings
of granite with deep crevices between, and Kino walked on bare unmarkable stone when he could
and leaped from ledge to ledge. He knew that wherever the trackers lost his path they must circle
and lose time before they found it again. And so he did not go straight for the mountains anymore;
he moved in zigzags, and sometimes he cut back to the south and left a sign and then went toward
the mountains over bare stone again. And the path rose steeply now, so that he panted a little as
he went.

The sun moved downward toward the bare stone teeth of the mountains, and Kino set his
direction for a dark and shadowy cleft in the range.

If there were any water at all, it would be there where he could see, even in the distance, a hint of
foliage. And if there were any passage through the smooth stone range, it would be by this same
deep cleft. It had its danger, for the trackers would think of it too, but the empty
water bottle did not let that consideration enter. And as the sun lowered, Kino and Juana
struggled wearily up the steep slope toward the cleft.

High in the gray stone mountains, under a frowning peak, a little spring bubbled out of a rupture
in the stone. It was fed by shade-preserved snow in the summer, and now and then it died
completely and bare rocks and dry algae were on its bottom. But nearly always it gushed out, cold
and clean and lovely. In the times when the quick rains fell, it might become a freshet and send its
column of white water crashing down the mountain cleft, but nearly always it was a lean little
spring. It bubbled out into a pool and then fell a hundred feet to another pool, and this one,
overflowing, dropped again, so that it continued, down and down, until it came to the rubble of
the upland, and there it disappeared altogether. There wasn’t much left of it then anyway, for
every time it fell over an escarpment the thirsty air drank it, and it splashed from the pools to the
dry vegetation. The animals from miles around came to drink from the little pools, and the wild
sheep and the deer, the pumas and raccoons, and the mice- all came to drink. And the birds which
spent the day in the brushland came at night to the little pools that were like steps in the
mountain cleft. Beside this tiny stream, wherever enough earth collected for root-hold, colonies
of plants grew, wild grape and little palms, maidenhair fern, hibiscus, and tall pampas grass with
feathery rods raised above the spike leaves. And in the pool lived frogs and water-skaters, and
waterworms crawled on the bottom of the pool. Everything that loved water came to these few
shallow places. The cats took their prey there, and strewed feathers and lapped water through
their bloody teeth. The little pools were places of life because of the water, and places of killing
because of the water, too.

The lowest step, where the stream collected before it tumbled down a hundred feet and
disappeared into the rubbly desert, was a little platform of stone and sand. Only a pencil of water

fell into the pool, but it was enough to keep the pool full and to keep the ferns green in the

183

--- PAGE 184 ---
underhang of the cliff, and wild grape climbed the stone mountain and all manner of little plants
found comfort here. The freshets had made a small sandy beach through which the pool flowed,
and bright green watercress grew in the damp sand. The beach was cut and scarred and padded by
the feet of animals that had come to drink and to hunt.

The sun had passed over the stone mountains when Kino and Juana struggled up the steep broken
slope and came at last to the water. From this step they could look out over the sunbeaten desert
to the blue Gulf in the distance. They came utterly weary to the pool, and Juana slumped to her
knees and first washed Coyotito's face and then filled her bottle and gave him a drink. And the
baby was weary and petulant, and he cried softly until Juana gave him her breast, and then he °
gurgled and clucked against her. Kino drank long and thirstily at the pool. For a moment, then, he
stretched out beside the water and relaxed all his muscles and watched Juana feeding the baby,
and then he got to his feet and went to the edge of the step where the water slipped over, and he
searched the distance carefully. His eyes set on a point and he became rigid. Far down the slope
he could see the two trackers; they were little more than dots or scurrying ants and behind thema
larger ant.

Juana had turned to look at him and she saw his back stiffen.
“How far?" she asked quietly.

"They will be here by evening,” said Kino. He looked up the long steep chimney of the cleft where
the water came down. "We must go west,” he said, and his eyes searched the stone shoulder
behind the cleft. And thirty feet up on the gray shoulder he saw a series of little erosion caves. He
slipped off his sandals and clambered up to them, gripping the bare stone with his toes, and he
looked into the shallow caves.

They were only a few feet deep, wind-hollowed scoops, but they sloped slightly downward and
back. Kino crawled into the largest one and lay down and knew that he could not be seen from the
outside. Quickly he went back to Juana.

“You must go up there. Perhaps they will not find us there,” he said.

Without question she filled her water bottle to the top, and then Kino helped her up to the shallow
cave and brought up the packages of food and passed them to her. And Juana sat in the cave
entrance and watched him. She saw that he did not try to erase their tracks in the sand.

Instead, he climbed up the brush cliff beside the water, clawing and tearing at the ferns and wild
grape as he went. And when he had climbed a hundred feet to the next bench, he came down
again. He looked carefully at the smooth rock shoulder toward the cave to see that there was no
trace of passage, and last he climbed up and crept into the cave beside Juana.

"When they go up,” he said, “we will slip away, down to the lowlands again. | am afraid only that
the baby may cry. You must see that he does not cry.”

“He will not cry,” she said, and she raised the baby’s face to her own and looked into his eyes and he
stared solemnly back at her.

“He knows,” said Juana.

Now Kino lay in the cave entrance, his chin braced on his crossed arms, and he watched the blue
shadow of the mountain move out across the brushy desert below until it reached the Gulf, and
the long twilight of the shadow was over the land.

The trackers were long in coming, as though they had trouble with the trail Kino had left. It was
dusk when they came at last to the little pool. And all three were on foot now, for a horse could

184

--- PAGE 185 ---
not climb the last steep slope. From above they were thin figures in the evening.

The two trackers scurried about on the little beach, and they saw Kino’s progress up the cliff
before they drank. The man with the rifle sat down and rested himself, and the trackers squatted
near him, and in the evening the points of their cigarettes glowed and receded.

And then Kino could see that they were eating, and the soft murmur of their voices came to him.
Then darkness fell, deep and black in the mountain cleft. The animals that used the pool came
near and smelled men there and drifted away again into the darkness.

He heard a murmur behind him. Juana was whispering, “Coyotito.” She was begging him to be
quiet. Kino heard the baby whimper, and he knew from the muffled sounds that Juana had
covered his head with her shawl.

Down on the beach a match flared, and in its momentary light Kino saw that two of the men were
sleeping, curled up like dogs, while the third watched, and he saw the glint of the rifle in the
match light. And then the match died, but it left a picture on Kino’s eyes. He could see it, just how
each man was, two sleeping curled up and the third squatting in the sand with the rifle between
his knees.

Kino moved silently back into the cave. Juana's eyes were two sparks reflecting a low star.
Kino crawled quietly close to her and he put his lips near to her cheek.

“There is a way,” he said.

“But they will kill you.”

“If | get first to the one with the rifle,” Kino said, "I must get to him first, then I will be all right. Two
are sleeping.”

Her hand crept out from under her shawl and gripped his arm. “They will see your white clothes in
the starlight.”

“No,” he said. “And | must go before moonrise.”

He searched for a soft word and then gave it up. “If they kill me,” he said, “lie quietly. And when
they are gone away, go to Loreto.”

Her hand shook a little, holding his wrist.

"There is no choice,” he said. “It is the only way. They will find us in the morning.” .

’ Her voice trembled a little. “Go with God,” she said.

He peered closely at her and he could see her large eyes. His hand fumbled out and found the
baby, and for a moment his palm lay on Coyotito's head. And then Kino raised his hand and touched
Juana's cheek, and she held her breath.

Against the sky in the cave entrance Juana could see that Kino was taking off his white clothes, for
dirty and ragged though they were they would show up against the dark night. His own brown skin
was a better protection for him. And then she saw how he hooked his amulet
neck-string about the horn handle of his great knife, so that it hung down in front of him and left
both hands free. He did not come back to her. For a moment his body was black in the cave
entrance, crouched and silent, and then he was gone.

Juana moved to the entrance and looked out. She peered like an owl from the hole in the
mountain, and the baby slept under the blanket on her back, his face turned sideways against her
neck and shoulder, She could feel his warm breath against her skin, and Juana whispered her

185

--- PAGE 186 ---
combination of prayer and magic, her Hail Marys and her ancient intercession, against the black
unhuman things.

The night seemed a little less dark when she looked out, and to the east there was a lightening in
the sky, down near the horizon where the moon would show. And, looking down, she could see the
cigarette of the man on watch.

Kino edged like a slow lizard down the smooth rock shoulder. He had turned his neck-string so that
the great knife hung down from his back and could not clash against the stone. His spread fingers
gripped the mountain, and his bare toes found support through contact, and even his chest lay
against the stone so that he would not slip. For any sound, a rolling pebble or a sigh, a little slip of
flesh on rock, would rouse the watchers below. Any sound that was not germane to the night
would make them alert. But the night was not silent; the little tree frogs that lived near the
stream twittered like birds, and the high metallic ringing of the cicadas filled the mountain cleft.
And Kino’s own music was in his head, the music of the enemy, low and pulsing, nearly asleep. But
the Song of the Family had become as fierce and sharp and feline as the snarl of a female puma.
The family song was alive now and driving him down on the dark enemy. The harsh cicada seemed
to take up its melody, and the twittering tree frogs called little phrases of it.

And Kino crept silently as a shadow down the smooth mountain face. One bare foot moved a few
inches and the toes touched the stone and gripped, and the other foot a few inches, and then the
palm of one hand a little downward, and then the other hand, until the whole body,
without seeming to move, had moved. Kino's mouth was open so that even his breath would make
no sound, for he knew that he was not invisible.

If the watcher, sensing movement, looked at the dark place against the stone which was his body,
he could see him. Kino must move so slowly he would not draw the watcher's eyes. It took hima
long time to reach the bottom and to crouch behind a little dwarf palm. His heart thundered in his
chest and his hands and face were wet with sweat. He crouched and took great slow long breaths
to calm himself.

Only twenty feet separated him from the enemy now, and he tried to remember the ground
between. Was there any stone which might trip him in his rush? He kneaded his legs against cramp
and found that his muscles were jerking after their long tension. And then he looked
apprehensively to the.east. The moon would rise in a few moments now, and he must attack
before it rose. He could see the outline of the watcher, but the sleeping men were below his
vision. It was the watcher Kino must find- must find quickly and without hesitation. Silently he
drew the amulet string over his shoulder and loosened the loop from the horn handle of his great
knife.

oe

He was too late, for as he rose from his crouch the silver edge of the moon slipped above the
eastern horizon, and Kino sank back behind his bush.

It was an old and ragged moon, but it threw hard light and hard shadow into the mountain cleft,
and now Kino could see the seated figure of the watcher on the little beach beside the pool. The
watcher gazed full at the moon, and then he lighted another cigarette, and the match illumined
his dark face for a moment. There could be no waiting now; when the watcher turned his head,
Kino must leap. His legs were as tight as wound springs.

And then from above came a little murmuring cry. The watcher turned his head to listen and then

he stood up, and one of the sleepers stirred on the ground and awakened and asked quietly, "What
is it?”

186

--- PAGE 187 ---
"| don’t know,” said the watcher. “It sounded like a cry, almost like a human- like a baby.”
The man who had been sleeping said, “You can't tell. I've heard a coyote pup cry like a baby.”

The sweat rolled in drops down Kino's forehead and fell into his eyes and burned them. The little
cry came again and the watcher looked up the side of the hill to the dark cave.

"Coyote maybe," he said, and Kino heard the harsh click as he cocked the rifle.

"If it’s a coyote, this will stop it,” the watcher said as he raised the gun.

Kino was in mid-leap when the gun crashed and the barrel-flash made a picture on his eyes. The
great knife swung and crunched hollowly. It bit through neck and deep into chest, and Kino was a
terrible machine now. He grasped the rifle even as he wrenched free his knife. His
strength and his movement and his speed were a machine. He whirled and struck the head of the
seated man like a melon. The third man scrabbled away like a crab, slipped into the pool, and
then he began to climb frantically, to climb up the cliff where the water penciled down.

His hands and feet threshed in the tangle of the wild grapevine, and he whimpered and gibbered
as he tried to get up. But Kino had become as cold and deadly as steel. Deliberately he threw the
lever of the rifle, and then he raised the gun and aimed deliberately and fired. He saw his enemy
tumble backward into the pool, and Kino strode to the water. In the moonlight he could see the
frantic eyes, and Kino aimed and fired between the eyes.

And then Kino stood uncertainly. Something was wrong, some signal was trying to get through to
his brain. Tree frogs and cicadas were silent now. And then Kino's brain cleared from its red
concentration and he knew the sound- the keening, moaning, rising hysterical cry from the
little cave in the side of the stone mountain, the cry of death.

Everyone in La Paz remembers the return of the family; there may be some old ones who saw it,
but those whose fathers and whose grandfathers told it to them remember it nevertheless. It is an
event that happened to everyone.

It was late in the golden afternoon when the first tittle boys ran hysterically in the town and
spread the word that Kino and Juana were coming back. And everyone hurried to see them. The
sun was settling toward the western mountains and the shadows on the ground were long.
And perhaps that was what left the deep impression on those who saw them.

The two came from the rutted country road into the city, and they were not walking in single file,
Kino ahead and Juana behind, as usual, but side by side. The sun was behind them and their long
shadows stalked ahead, and they seemed to carry two towers of darkness with them. Kino had a
rifle across his arm and Juanacarried her shawl like a sack over her shoulder. And in it was a small
limp heavy bundle. The shawl was crusted with dried blood, and the bundle swayed a little as she
walked.

Her face was hard and lined and leathery with fatigue and with the tightness with which she
fought fatigue. And her wide eyes stared inward on herself. She was as remote and as removed as
Heaven. Kino's lips were thin and his jaws tight, and the people say that he carried fear with him,
that he was as dangerous as a rising storm. The people say that the two seemed to be removed
from human experience; that they had gone through pain and had come out on the other side;
that there was almost a magical protection about them. And those people who had rushed to see
them crowded back and let them pass and did not speak to them.

King and Juana walked through the city as though it were not there.

187

--- PAGE 188 ---
Their eyes glanced neither right nor left nor up nor down, but stared only straight ahead. Their
legs moved a little jerkily, like well-made wooden dolls, and they carried pillars of black fear
about them. And as they walked through the stone and plaster city brokers peered at them from
barred windows and servants put one eye to a slitted gate and mothers turned the faces of their
youngest children inward against their skirts. Kino and Juana strode side by side through the stone
and plaster city and down among the brush houses, and the neighbors stood
back and let them pass. Juan Tomas raised his hand in greeting and did not say the greeting and
left his hand in the air for a moment uncertainly.

In Kino’s ears the Song of the Family was as fierce as a cry. He was immune and terrible, and his
song had become a battle cry. They trudged past the burned square where their house had been
without even looking at it. They cleared the brush that edged the beach and picked their way
down the shore toward the water. And they did not look toward Kino's broken canoe.

And when they came to the water's edge they stopped and stared out over the Gulf. And then
Kino laid the rifle down, and he dug among his clothes, and then he held the great pearl in his
hand. He looked into its surface and it was gray and ulcerous. Evil faces peered from it into
his eyes, and he saw the light of burning. And in the surface of the pearl he saw the frantic
eyes of the man in the pool. And in the surface of the pearl he saw Coyotito lying in the little
cave with the top of his head shot away. And the pearl was ugly; it was gray, like a malignant
growth. And Kino heard the music of the pearl, distorted and insane. Kino’s hand shook a
little, and he turned slowly to Juana and held the pearl out to her. She stood beside him, still
holding her dead bundle over her shoulder, She looked at the pearl in his hand for a moment
and then she looked into Kino's eyes and said softly, "No, you.”

And Kino drew back his arm and flung the pearl with all his might. Kino and Juana watched it go,
winking and glimmering under the setting sun.

They saw the little splash in the distance, and they stood side by side watching the place for a long
time.

And the pearl settled into the lovely green water and dropped toward the bottom. The waving
branches of the algae called to it and beckoned to it. The lights on its surface were green and
lovely. It settled down to the sand bottom among the fern-like plants. Above, the surface of
the water was a green mirror. And the pearl lay on the floor of the sea. Acrab scampering over the
bottom raised a little cloud of sand, and when it settled the pearl was gone.

And the music of the pearl drifted to a whisper and disappeared.

About the Novelist:

John Steinbeck (February 27, 1902 - December 20, 1968) was an American writer. He won the
1962 Nobel Prize in Literature “for his realistic and imaginative writings, combining as they do
sympathetic humor and keen social perception”. He has been called “a giant of American letters.”
During his writing career, he authored 33 books, with one book coauthored alongside Edward
Ricketts, including 16 novels, six non-fiction books, and two collections of short stories. He is widely
known for the comic novels Tortilla Flat (1935) and Cannery Row (1945), the multi-generation epic y
East of Eden (1952), and the novellas The Red Pony (1933) and Of Mice and Men (1937). The Pulitzer pf
Prize-winning The Grapes of Wrath (1939)is considered Steinbeck’s masterpiece and part of the
American literary canon. By the 75th anniversary of its publishing date, it had sold 14 million copies.
Most of Steinbeck’s work is set in central California, particularly in the Salinas Valley and the California Coast Ranges
region. His works frequently explored the themes of fate and injustice, especially as applied to downtrodden or everyman
protagonists.

(source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John Steinbeck)

188

--- PAGE 189 ---
Summary: The Pearl takes place in a small village on the outskirts of La Paz, California. It begins
in the brush house of Kino, Juana, and their baby, Coyotito, a family of Mexican Native Americans.
In the midst of Kino and Juana’s morning routine, Coyotito is stung by a scorpion that has fallen
into his hanging box.

Aware of how poisonous the scorpion's sting is, Juana orders that the doctor be gotten and when
the doctor refuses to come to them, insists they go to the doctor themselves. Kino, Juana,
Coyotito, and their neighbors proceed together to the city. When the servant reports their arrival
at his gate, the doctor, lounging indulgently in bed, is insulted by the mere notion that he would
“cure insect bites for ‘little Indians” without compensation. The servant informs Kino that the
doctor will not be able to see them and Kino punches the gate, infuriated by the doctor's evident
discrimination.

Kino and Juana set off in their canoe to search for pearls. Kino dives down to the seafloor and finds
one oyster lying alone, gleaming from within. Upon returning to the canoe, Kino opens this oyster
last and finds within it the most perfect pearl in the world.

News of Kino’'s pearl spreads rapidly through the town, inspiring desire and envy in everyone who
hears of it. When Juan Tomas asks Kino what he will do as a rich man, he responds that he and
Juana will be married in a church, that they will have new clothes, that he will have a rifle, and
that his son will receive an education.

The priest visits the brush house to remind Kino and Juana to thank God. Then the doctor, inspired
by the news of the pearl, arrives in order to treat the baby. He administers a first treatment and
predicts that the poison will strike within the hour. Within the hour, Coyotito indeed becomes ill
and the doctor administers a second treatment to cure him. Kino promises to pay the doctor after
selling the pearl, which the doctor feigns not to have heard about.

That night, after dark, Kino hears noises in the house and manages to strike a thief looking for the
pearl with his knife, but is also struck in return, Juana begs, to no avail, that they get rid of the

pearl.
The next day, Kino and Juana, followed by their neighbors, go to visit the pearl dealers. The first
dealer Kino visits assesses the pearl at a mere 1000 pesos, declaring it too big and clumsy to be
worth anything more, though it is clearly more valuable than he lets on. Kino accuses the dealer of
cheating him, so the dealer instructs Kino to ask around for other appraisals, which are even
worse than the first. Kino concludes that he's been cheated and decides to go to the capital for a
better estimate.
That night, Kino fights off another attacker. Juana tries to throw the pearl into the ocean, but Kino
follows her, rips the pearl away from her, and beats her to the ground. Some minutes later, Juana
rises to discover that Kino has been attacked yet again, and, this time, has killed his attacker. Now
that Kino is guilty of murder, Kino and Juana truly must leave the town.
As Kino approaches the canoe to prepare for their departure, he sees that someone has made a
hole in its bottom. Then, upon seeing that their house is engulfed in flames, the family seeks
refuge in Juan Tomas's house. They flee north at nighttime, pursued by trackers who have
followed them from the village.
The family retreats into a cave on a mountainside, under which the trackers come to rest at night.
When it’s completely dark, Kino prepares to attack them but, as he is about to, Coyotito lets out a
cry, provoking one of the trackers to shoot at what he assumes to be a coyote. Though Kino
succeeds in killing the men, Coyotito has already been shot dead.
8 a A
189

--- PAGE 190 ---
Juana and Kino, united and beleaguered, walk back to the village side-by-side with Coyotito’s
dead body in Juana’s shawl. Kino throws the pearl back into the sea.

(oO Post-reading

* How would you justify that the pearl reflects its owner's idea of what sacrifices might
accompany those values?

. OPearls are seen as symbol of purity, wisdom, wealth, and status. Discuss.

Glossary
Words Meanings Synonyms

extreme greed for wealth or material gain

poor; impoverished
consolation comfort or solace in a time of distress or sadness
detachment | the state of being objective and impartial

a defensive wall or embankment
estuary the tidal mouth of a large river, where the tide meets the river current
gloating to exult or revel maliciously or triumphantly
incandescence| the emission of light as a result of being heated

referring to a triangular sail set on a long yard at

an angle of 45 degrees to the mast

a soft, moist mass, typically of herbs or vegetables, applied

to the body to relieve inflammation and promote healing

telescopically | in a manner that slides or extends like a telescope

nerves, eyes, and mucous membranes
(of a tumor or disease) tending to spread to other parts of.the body

apprehensively

--- PAGE 191 ---
in a tedious and repetitive way [. Ressana ay
outcroppings | a rock or group of rocks protruding from the
earth's surface
threshed beat or strike repeatedly paet3. dawg

Comprehension

a) Answer the following question.

1. What does Kino mean by, “This pearl has become my soul. “If | give it up | shall lose my
soul...” Do you agree with him?

2. Describe the setting of the novel "The Pearl”

3. Asympathetic character is a character that you can identify with and care about.
Which character in the pearl do you think is the most sympathetic and why?

4. What forces might be set up to destroy Kino's future?

5. Describe the part of the book that you found most interesting, then explain why this part was so

- interesting to you.

6. Discuss the characters, conflict and settings of the novel. .

7. Discuss the various animal imagery that functions throughout the novel: the ants, the
scorpion, the hissing snakes, the schools of fish, the oysters, the dogs, and the pearl
buyers as octopuses, etc.

8. Describe in detail Kino and Juana’s simple life before and after the discovery of the
pearl.

9. How does Steinbeck characterize the doctor? How does he let the reader know that
the white powder which the doctor administers to Coyotito is actually a poison which
would kill the baby if the doctor did not return?

10. How does the priest function as a travesty of religion? Discuss.

11. Why are the pearl buyers referred to as “fatherly” and "benevolent"? How does this
contradict their real purposes? Are they also victimized?

12. Why are the “dark ones” and the trackers never identified? What is gained by
Steinbeck's not identifying them? - ,

13. A symbol can change its meaning during the course of a novel. How does the pearl
change its meaning during the course of this novel?

14. Kino believes that it would be better to kill a person than to kill a canoe because a
canoe has no relatives to revenge it. What types of values are operative in such a
statement?

15. Kino and Juana function more or less on a primitive level in their lives and in their
religion, yet they both want a church wedding and a christening for Coyotito. How are
these values consistent with their lives? How are they contradictory?

16. What is the function of the many songs that Kino hears during the course of the novel?

iN

191

--- PAGE 192 ---
Formal Letter Writing

Formal Letter
Formal Letters, refer to as commercial enterprise Letters or |
professional Letters, which are written in a strict and precise |
layout. Formal letters are clearly a lot extra formal in fashion than
casual/ friendly letters. Formal letters can be written forsome of | Rei
reasons which include, — —

* Toexpress your issues at the same time as operating in a professional setup
To provide reliable facts across your workspace
To order items, to use for employment, and so forth.

To the Editor of a newspaper addressing the problems confronted by using diverse
groups of human beings in distinct areas, and so forth.

Structure of a formal Letter

To write a formal letter, first you have to understand the reason to write it. Formal letters are
concerned on their structure of the letter adjustments relying on the type of letter. There are
sure policies to be followed with a purpose to draft a proper letter. Each sentence should be
nicely noted out and laid down in a manner that the message you need to convey should be
particular and clean to the reader,

Always address these letters to The Editor’ and end with ‘Yours faithfully’. Letters to the Editor are
letters that express concerns that should be addressed to the higher authorities. These letters
should be professional and authentic. No newspaper would publish anonymous letters, so make
sure you are writing the letter for a cause and provide your name and address correctly.

Writing a Formal Letter - Parts of a Formal Letter

When writing a formal letter, always be respectful and conscious of your language, no matter
what the subject of the letter might be. To write a formal letter, there are some points to be
remembered.
e Always start with the sender's address
e Thisis followed by the date.
e The receiver's address comes next. The receiver can be the name of the firm or the one
who represents the firm.
e The subject of the letter is very important. It is a statement of the purpose of the letter. It
should be written ina single line.
e Thesalutation can be Dear Sir/Ma’am. If it is a person you know well, you can address them
by their name, ‘Dear Sara khan’.
e Thebody of the letter can be written in 3 paragraphs.
¢ The first paragraph should be aimed at introducing yourself and stating the purpose of your
letter. The second paragraph should furnish all the information about the matter.
* The third paragraph can be a concluding paragraph where you lay out your expectations
regarding the matter.
* To close the letter, you can use a complimentary closing like "Yours faithfully’, ‘Yours
sincerely’ etc.

e Unlike informal letters, the signature should include your name (in block letters) and
designation below your signature.

192

--- PAGE 193 ---
Ali Ahmed

House#23-B ,St# 6
F-10/2, Islamabad 44000
8th September, 2023

The Editor
The News
Islamabad.

Subject: Repair of the road in Rawalpindi
Sir, °

| would like to bring to your notice that the people in and around Rawalpindi have been facing
difficulties in travelling back and forth because of the bad condition of the roads there. We have
appealed to the Municipality, but there has not been any response on the issue so far.

As our appeals to their office have had no effect, we believe that perhaps a mention in the media
would be of great help. Since the beginning of the last month, the roads in Rawalpindi have been
almost impassable. The surface is badly broken up by the heavy rains, and on a dark night, it is
positively dangerous for vehicles to pass that way. Moreover, there are heaps of road metal on both
sides of the road, which leave very little room in the middle. The residents of the area have been
inconvenienced in this way for weeks.

The situation is becoming worse. There have been multiple accidents happening due to this
condition. | request you to highlight the seriousness of the matter in your newspaper so that the
road may be properly repaired without further delay.

Thanking You :

Yours sincerely,

Signature

Ali Ahmed

Resident

Task: Write a letter to newspaper editor tell him about the increasing street crimes rates in
your city and suggest him some steps to control these crimes as soon as possible.

Teacher's Note :

Encourage students to perform a drama/ role play/play script showing different roles and scenarios
through deliberate choice of dialogues/ speech, gestures and movements.

Ask them to evaluate how authors use language, including figurative language, considering the impact on
the reader. Discuss others’ reading critically, taking account of their views. Express informed opinions,
justify the viewpoint and make recommendations and develop an interest ina variety of texts.

Motivate them to analyse how an author's choices concerning how to structure specific parts of a text (e.g.,
the choice of where to begin or end a story, the choice to provide a comedic or tragic resolution) contribute
to its overall structure and meaning as well as its aesthetic impact.

Let them to evaluate the particular elements of a story or drama (e.g., how the setting shapes the
characters or plot).identify rhyme schemes and figurative language in poems.Evaluate stages of plot
development in a fictional text.(exposition, setting, climax, character development, resolution).Examine
how complex characters (e.g., those with multiple or conflicting motivations) course of a text, interact
with other characters, and advance the plot or develop the theme.

Ask them to analyze multiple interpretations of a story, drama, or poem (e.g., recorded or live production
of a play or recorded novel or poetry), evaluating how each version interprets the source text,

Let them read, view and analyse a variety of reading grade-appropriate and high-interest books and texts
from print and non-print sources: Drama (play scripts)

Motivate them to write formal letters and emails to people in extended academic (professional)
environments for various purposes.

193

--- PAGE 194 ---
About Authors

Ruhi Zaka Malik, M. A English Literature and B.ed has 27 years of teaching
experience to her credit. She retired as Head of English Dept from ICB as
Associate Professor. She has authored number of books for various Textbook
Boards;PTB, KPK, Baluchistan and NBF.

Amber Kashif excels in crafting and compelling written material after a deep
research to structure information in a clear and engaging manner. She
received her Master's degree in English Literature from The University of
Punjab, Lahore and started her career in 2003 from IMCG F-8/1. Later on
joined Federal Directorate of Education in 2007 as JLT. Now a days she is
serving as SST in IMCG F-7/4, Islamabad. She reviewed number of English
books in National Curriculum Wing from 2010 till 2013.She developed English
text books not only for the private sector but also shared her expertise in NBF's
English Text Books.

