--- PAGE 1 ---
Based on National Curriculum of Pakistan 2022-23

Model Textbook of
English

Grade
11

National Curriculum Council
Ministry of Federal Education and Professional Training

National Book Foundation
as
Federal Textbook Board
Islamabad

--- PAGE 2 ---
Government Approval
Approved by the National Curriculum Council (NCC), Ministry of Federal Education and Professional Training, Islamabad
vide letter No. F.No.1-1 (2024)-NCC/DEA/Dir/English, Dated: 04th March 2024

© 2024 National Book Foundation (NBF) as Federal Textbook Board

red ay form or bya ear strictly reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored Sets tardies
ee rn an aoe een otherwise—without the
A Model Textbook of English for Grade 11 .
based on Pakistan National Curriculum (NCP) 2022-23
Authors

Ruhl Zaka (Managing Author)
Amber Kashif, Sadia Malik, Iffat Nazeer, Shazia Shakeel (Co-Authors)

Contributors/Collaborators
Inam Ullah Jan, Shahazad Ahmad, Zulfiqar Ahmed (Designers)

Supervision of Curriculum and Review Process
Dr. Mariam Chughtai
Director, National Curriculum Council (NCC)
Ministry of Federal Education and Professional Training, Government of Pakistan, \slamabad

Internal Review Committee Members
Robina Shaheen, Fazaia Teacher Training Institute Islamabad, Nosheen Zafar, Fazala Teacher Training Institute Islamabad
Mamoona Ikhiaq, Naval Education Headquarter Islamabad, Ayesha Khalid, Naval Education Headquarter Islamabad
Khalil Ur Rehman, Federal Government Educational institutions (FGE!) (C/G) Regional Office Chaklala / Cantt
Arfa Batool, Federal Government Educational Institutions (FGE!) (C/G) Regional Office Chaklala / Cantt
Sofla Altaf, Army Public Schools & Colleges System Rawalpindi, Muhammad Yousaf Khan, Fazia Schools And Collages
Umar Farooq, Federal Directorate Of Education, Saima Hafeez

Mr. Anis-ur- Rehman, School Edu Department Bolochistan, Dr. Lubna Shaheen, School Edu Department Bolochistan
Inamullah Khan, Drectorate Of Curriculum And Teacher Education Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Abbottabad,
Inamullah Haq Hashmi,Azad Government Of Jammu & Kashmir Directorate Of Curriculum Research & Development
Ms. Arfa Batool, Federal Government Educational Institutions (FGEI) (C/G) Regional Office Chaklala / Cantt
Abdul Wahab, Khalil Ur Rehman, Federal Government Educational institutions (FGEI) (C/G) Regional Office Chakiala / Cantt

Desk Officer
Shazla Abbasi, National Curriculum Counell (NCC)

NBF Textbooks Development Supervision
Murad All Mohmand :
Managing Director, National Book Foundation (NBF)

In-Chage, NBF Textbooks Development
Mansoor Ahmad, Assistant Director

Printed in Pakistan
First Edition - First Impression: March 2024 | Pages: 220 | Quantity: 34000
First Edition - Second impression: May 2024 | Pages: 220 | Quantity: 85000
First Edition - Third impression: October 2024 | Pages: 220 | Quantity: 15000

Price: PKR 380/-, Code: STE-691, ISBN: 978-969-37-1603-0
Printer: Iqra Publisher & Printers, Peshawar

For details on additional publications from the National Book Foundation, please visit our website at www.nbhorg.pk
You can also reach us by phone at 051 9261125 or via email at books @nbf.org.pk
For feedback or corrections, kindly send your comments to ‘nbftextbooks@gmalil.com' and ‘textbooks@snc.gov.pk’

Note
All illustrations, artwork, and images In this book are Intended solely for educational

and promotional purposes, benefiting the public interest.

‘nalich.114 Fadaral ISR Cini SidaR Prnracc Riek RATA DIRK Pe: ??

--- PAGE 3 ---
Preface

Model Text Book of Grade 11: An Introduction to the structure and purposes.

This textbook is developed in accordance with National Curriculum of Pakistan IX-XII (NCP) 2022-23. This text
book is aimed to provide students of elementary grades with a wide range of activities to help them achieve
students learning objectives of their appropriate age/grade. The book provides the students with a range of
fiction and non-fiction texts which are acquired from both authentic sources as well as exclusively produced for
this age group of Pakistan students. The selection/development of contents of books has been purposely carried
outin the context of multilingual communities where Englishis treated as second orthird language.

This unique arrangement of textual materials provide a platform where students can improve their reading,
writing, speaking and listening skills. Themes of the selected texts are selected in accordance with list of themes
provided in SNCacross the wide range of genre indicated in NCP. The ethical concepts embedded in the texts will
engage students to think and relate with real concerns of their lives and reflect upon their own personality
development towards a becoming a responsible citizen. This bookis designed to provide a wide range of readings
with a variety of local, national and international contexts which will enable students to learn more about their
identity and connection to the world. The variety of activities will help them to think criticall and make these
connections.

This book is structured in a way to provide in-depth knowledge and exposure to different types/genres of literary
texts. Units are grouped together in a section with a specific theme like narratives, poetry or drama. Each section
has set of activities towards the end to engage the students in high order thinking skills, critical evaluation,
differentiate and extended activities is given tosetall in the backdrop of contextual needs. Each unit begins witha
pre-reading activity and have while reading activities to keep students engaged in the reading and help them in
comprehension of the text. Each unit has a range of questions based on different stages of understanding and
comprehension and students will have to answer questions based on reading for detail to reading for
inferences and ideas. Use of dictionary and pronunciation.is taught through direct and indirect usages of
dictionary sources.

There is strong focus of writing activities and for that, a wide rangé.writing assignments are introduced which
required outcomes both as independent writers as well as in pairs/groupwork. The variety of writing assignments
has been designed to reveal students with different types of texts like informational texts, expository text and
imaginative work of writing. Activities like role-plays, debates, one-minute speech, drama and poetry recitals
are introduced to provide students with opportunities of listening and speaking English. These activities are
designed with special focus on listening and speaking for different audiences and different situations. The
purpose of these activities is to provide backdrop to develop effective communication skills in English. The
difficulty level of all activities is varied to cater for learning needs of students from multili ngual backgrounds and
multiple local/national context.

The targets of all planned activities can be achieved fully with an active support of teacher, Evidently all such
activities shall require diligent effort of teacher to quide the students in appropriate manner as well as to provide
them with continuous support. Activities requiring searching for additional information through library and/or
online sources shall also need special assistance from teacher. This active support from the teacher shall help

students to fully benefit from this purposely designed textbook of English to acquire better English language
skills.

Dr. Raja Mazhar Hameed
Managing Director

--- PAGE 4 ---
S.No

1

ul

[os]

©

10

1

_

1

N

1

Ww

14

1

ul

1

o

17

Contents

Units

Family Values In Pakistan

Shooting Stars
Hal Borland (Non-Fiction) —

The Wind (Poem)
Robert Louis Stevenson

Butterflies (Short story)
Roger Dean Kiser

Clean water and Sanitation

The Darkling Thrush (Poem)

Thomas Hardy

World Heritage Sites in
Pakistan

Social Media:
A Blessing or a Curse?

Sunshine After Rain (Poem)
Brenda Winders

The Small Woman:
Alan Burgess (a biography)

The Three Questions
Leo Tolstoy

Break Break Break (Poem)
Lord Alfred Tennyson

Blow, Blow, Thou (Poem)
William Shakespeare

Choice of a Profession
The Ninny

Anton Chekhov

Fourteen (One-Act Play)
Alice Gerstenberg

The Last Leaf (Short Story)
O. Henry

The Necklace (Short story)
Guy de Maupassant

Theme

Communication &
Collaboration «|

Innovation &
Creativity

SDG-Millennium
Development Goals

Literature & Poetry
Travel & Tourism
Digital Media

Drug Education

Literature and Fiction
Lyric Poetry ,

Lyric Poetry

Entrepreneurship
SDGs

Literature and Drama

Literature and Fiction

Literature and Fiction

Sub-Theme

© Teamwork
® Decision Making

® Creativity in Science
® Nature

® Narrative

® Clean water &
sanitation

® Nature

® GIS Application
© Smart & Sustainable
Environment Matters

* MOOC
e Im on
culture & Economy

® Drug Education
in Schools
© Refusal Skills

® Teamwork
® Decision Making
© War & Peace

® Human Relationships

* Philosophical fiction

® Ethical lesson in a
fictional framework

e Expression of human loss
Transience of human life juxtaposed
* with permanence of time and sea

® Harshness of life compared
with the bitterness of the West Wind
© Reflective, meloncholic poetry

® Role in a Society
® Decent work &
Economic Growth

© Speaking up for yourself
® Stress Mana it
® Decisign Making

© fer ar of societal structures on
individual identity and the human experience

|English-11 Federal ISB Siq1 SideA Process Blane (4/2Ql2022023-05:-25 :22

--- PAGE 5 ---
Page#
6
15
25
40
55
70
81
91
102
114
125
141
151
158
72
80
195
206

4 8
a i ie $i _
=| #3 aR iq is
ae it H al mur AE
£5 HME re Halt) if
: ig Hel : i lee
Ln i I idee f Hi
EK i Hl ll é Hi LE i

--- PAGE 6 ---
After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

respond to texts for different purposes (including arguments and discussions) \
respond to questions on a range of communicative skills

engage in extended discussions and take into account other speaker's viewpoints and presenting
one's own with clarity

use pre-reading and while reading strategies to analyze and explore different layers of
meaning within text

identify sentence patterns and structure for grade specific genres

give an informal personal and analytical response to a text and provide some supporting
textual reference

read to analyze descriptive/argumentative, persuasive essays

construct sentences using the sentence patterns and structures learnt in earlier classes
identify and use phrasal verbs in sentences

demonstrate understanding of figurative language, word relationships

write informative/explanatory texts to examine and convey complete ideas, concepts and
clearly

use precise words and phrases, telling details, and sensory language to to convey a vivid
: picture of the experiences, events, settings and/or characters

tread,
wt 12

a

--- PAGE 7 ---
P unit 1. FAMILY VALUES IN PAKISTAN
= - neta tee emninrier |

Pre-Reading
* What is the concept of a family?
* Identify some family values.

In Pakistan, family is a “bond of relationships”, which strengthens the relationships of a
family. Family members love and respect each other without any expectations.

The tenets of Islam further strengthens this bond. The existing
family ties, based on selflessness, are well watered by the injunctions .
of Islam. According to Islam;“we must look after our parents, Why is family taken as a
especially in their old age, when they are gone perish minded. It can | “pond of relationship”?
be said that.universal teachings of our religion are the essential part
of our family values.

People in Pakistan mostly follow the joint family system and live their lives with their
parents. They give much respect to their customs and traditions and pay due attention to family
values. The value of a strong family system has played an important role in influencing an
individual's way of living, social role, choice of profession and decision-making. A strong family
unit creates a safe, positive and supportive place for all members to thrive in. They are able to
utilize resources and live together ina fairly healthy manner.

Each member of a Pakistani family has respect for the elder family members. The
grandparents form a central beacon in a traditional Pakistani family. They are treated with
reverence and hold an authoritative place. They. work together with other elder family members
to solve problems and pass their skills and experiences to the next generation. They are good
“role models” and are looked upon as the primary source of guidance. Accordingly, they are
provided with care and support from their family members.

The male members of the family are generally considered to be the guardians of the
family and play a significant role for the well-being of their family. The major decisions, in the
family, are taken by them and their words go unquestioned. Their dream is to support their family
members and work for their social and financial well-being. When all the male members work
together and contribute equally to the family, the financial burden is minimized and the elements
of jealousy and evil also remain under control. The family members are able to prosper and thrive
together.

In joint family units all the family members live together
and share joys and sorrows with each other. The elders, in the
family, set the tone by reaching out to their friends and community
and teach their children the importance of doing the same. All the Who is the guardian of a
female members of the family handle jointly the household | family?
responsibilities and support each other in the household chores. As
children spend most of their time under their custody, the entire grooming of children is also done
by them. Women consider their family as their entire world and jointly fulfill their family needs
and wants.

nh a eh Use ieee 7

ee

--- PAGE 8 ---
FAMILY VALUES IN PAKISTAN

At the same time, the families in Pakistan never fail to look at children in the family as
"gifts from Allah(34<.). " All the elder family members are responsible for teaching the children
the basic beliefs of religion. Family values, customs and traditions are also transferred to children
by their elders and they are also taught to respect and honour their elders. The children watch
their parents taking care of their grandparents and also make well-
thought-out decisions over the years. This role guides the children to
be supportive and good decision-makers. Among the children of | How do children make
strong families, the moral and emotional problems are lesser. They | well-thought-out
tend to go on to have strong, healthy families of their own, having \decisions?
learned examples from their elders.

While-reading °

Our family values look to us dreamlike and we thank Allah(%<.-), for we are tied into a
cohesive whole of the family system. Sometimes, poverty and other problems happen to
overshadow some of our family units, but, with the role of the state and education of the people,
we can easily avert these dangers. Nevertheless, such bitter phenomena are rarely found.

Tersely, in Pakistan, people absorb the traditional and cultural family values and they
demonstrate respect and.regard to their elders. People’s main objective is “living together,
growing together and surviving together”. Here, giving physical and emotional support is quite
usual in a joint family system. This leads to a happy, healthy and prospering family which benefits
the society as a whole. It is said that one good family builds a good community, then all good
communities build a good society and at the end all good societies jointly make a successful
nation.

Se a Sere ~ Che a eli eS ol.

--- PAGE 9 ---
F unit 1 | FAMILY VALUES IN PAKISTAN

bis

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give

synonyms of each in the given column. The first one is done for you. Also use these words
in your own sentences.

Words Meanings : Synonyms
thrive to grow or develop well flourish, prosper
beacon a lighthouse or other signal for guidance

reverence deep respect

perish minded a person with spoiled mind

utilize to make use of

authoritative authentic, accurate

significant important , powerful

thrive develop, flourish

cohesive united, working together

bewitching united, connected

avert to turn away, to turn aside

phenomena fact, happening

demonstrate to show clearly

prospering doing well, flourishing

= Reading and Critical Thinking

a. Answer these questions
1. Discuss the characteristics of family as a ‘bond of relationships’.
2. Explain the way elderly family members are given respect by others in Pakistani
society?
3. The joint family system help the children to grawwith posjtiyity. Give reasons.
4. Describe the way children are brought-up and nursed in the, traditional Pakistani

family? &

5. Describe how the physical and‘emotional support is a strength in a joint family
system. °

6. Who can play positive role to keep the family values in Pakistan intact and how?
7. Analyze the text carefully and identify the theme of the unit.

--- PAGE 10 ---
FAMILY VALUES IN PAKISTAN

b) Choose the correct option:
i. Family values, customs and traditions are transferred to children by

a) extended family b) their elders c) their close friends
ii. The central beacon in a Pakistani traditional family is created by
a)auntsanduncles __b) cousins c) grandparents
iii. The tenets of Islam further -—-———— this bond
a) weakens b) threatens c) strengthens d) finishes
iv. Universal teachings of our religion are the -———- part of our family values
a) negligible b) essential c) moderate d) minimal
v. Our family values look to us:
a) an eye-wash b) unimportant c) dreamlike d) disappointing

«ay Oral Communication

Activity

+ Share the happiest moment of yourlife with your grandparents and your class fellows.
» Acknowledge the role of your grandparents in the life of your parents and also yours.

- Form groups in the class. Exchange views about the concept of happy family life living
with grand parents.

+ Give enough time to each group to present the viewpoint.

- After exchanging viewpoints, make a chart of the main key points, highlighted in the
class discussion.

Topic Sentence and Supporting Details

| Topic sentence: | The real beauty of any nation lies within its traditions, values, and
- "culture.
Supporting Details in Pakistan, a family is not merely a group of people who are together

just by nature, here family is a “bond of relationships” in which
people are joined to each other with emotional ties, where every
relation makes the other relation complete, where family members
love and respect each other without any expectations and where
| _ __| elders are regarded with dignity and honor.

* Read the passage carefully and mark topic sentences and supporting details from
fourth and sixth paragraphs.

+ What is the difference between ‘customs’ and ‘traditions?

* How would you explain ‘needs’ and ‘whims’ in context with the text?

a=; 10 ex. Shea ae

--- PAGE 11 ---
P -unit1 | FAMILY VALUES IN PAKISTAN

Extensive Reading

It is a great truth that the degree of happiness may vary according to the degree of virtue;
and consequently, the life which is most virtuous is most happy. Every degree of virtue has
a proportionate degree of happiness accompanying it. If we expect too much from life, we
cannot be happy. It is only by giving to life what we can best afford, that we can lead a
joyous life. Life is not self-aggrandizement. Aself-seeker and selfish man can never do any
good to others. It is only by realizing that the needs and desires of others are important

and should be addressed. Let us share the sufferings of others if we want to keep away
from sorrow.

Quest of happiness is a noble pursuit and it is worth striving, no matter how far we
succeed. The question arises whether human failure to achieve perfect felicity does not
have an injurious effect on character, it is not so; but on the contrary the difficulties and
sufferings thatewe undergo in our life, are really blessings in disguise, which help in
developing our character. Character, in fact is conquest of the lower self by the upper self
in us. Once the character building is done, success and happiness is in easy reach. We must
keep in mind that happiness is a condition of the mind. It does not depend on something
external. It springs from withing Contentment is the first condition of happiness. Ahappy
and congenial life is a source of immeasurable joy and contentment. In such a
surrounding, one can find love, trust, and mutual respect form those around. Family
members share each other's triumphs.and tribulations, creating a supportive environment
where each person feels valued and understood. Communication flows openly, fostering a
sense of unity and understanding. In a happy family, laughter and shared moments of joy
are frequent occurrences, making every day a celebration of togetherness. This kind of
harmonious atmosphere does not only add to the well-being of individual family members
but also strengthens the family’s resilience in facing life's challenges.

(The Bookvof Virtues by William J. Bennett)

ee, Vocabulary and Grammar *

a. Identify correct spellings of the words by looking them up in a dictionary.

| he ]
Pursue _ Traditions Marely Social
| Peruse treditions Marily Socail
|
Beacon Honour | Erode Prosper
Beakon oonor aerode Procepar

- _

--- PAGE 12 ---
P unit 1 FAMILY VALUES IN PAKISTAN

Sentence: A sentence is a set of words that is complete in itself, typically containing a
subject and predicate, conveying a statement, question, exclamation, or command, and
consisting of a main clause and sometimes one or more subordinate clauses. (Oxford
Dictionary).

Kinds of sentences:

Declarative Sentences

A declarative sentence is the most basic type of sentence. Its purpose is to relay
information, and it is punctuated with a period. For example

The boy walked home.
| love honey.
Interrogative Sentences

Interrogative sentences interrogate, or ask questions. These are direct questions, and they
are punctuated with a question mark. For example:

Why does the sun shine?
Whose dog is that?
Will you go to Lahore?

Exclamatory Sentences

Exclamatory sentences are like declarative sentences. They make a statement instead of
asking a question, but their main purpose is to express strong emotion. They have an
exclamation point instead of a period. For example:

| said | wanted tacos instead of pizza!
How well he sings!

Wow, he just won a gold medal!
Imperative Sentences

Imperative sentences do not simply state a fact but rather tell someone to do something.
These can be in the form of friendly advice, basic instructions or more forceful commands.
For example:

Please shut the door to keep out the bugs.

Turn left at the bridge.

Stop bothering me!

Optative Sentences

Optative sentences express a prayer, wish, curse, etc.For example:
May Allah bless us all.

May you become successful in life.

Long live Pakistan.

Activity: Make one sentence each according ‘ta the types given above.

| Ea 12

--- PAGE 13 ---
fe one” | ; FAMILY VALUES IN PAKISTAN

b) Write two sentences of each type given in information box.
Declarative Sentences

Interrogative Sentences

Exclamatory Sentences
Imperative Sentences

Phrasal Verbs
‘a) Phrasal verbs: A verb combined with an adverb or a preposition or sometimes both, to
give a new meaning is called phrasal verb.

Examples: left over, breakout, see off
i) Fillin the blanks with the correct phrasal verbs in the following sentences.
Please--------- your shoes before entering the house. ,
* takeup
* take off
* takeover
ii) The storm forced us to ------------ our camping trip.
¢ calloff
* callout
* callup
iii) Ineed to ------------ on my math homework before | can go out.
* catchon
* catchup
* catchout
iv) We need to --------------- with a plan to address this issue.
* comeupwith
* come over withit
* come around with °
b) Use the following phrasal verbs in sentences.
ask for
aim at

--- PAGE 14 ---
F unit 1 | FAMILY VALUES IN PAKISTAN

back up
believe in
blow away
blow up
c) Punctuate the given lines.

at the same time, the families in pakistan never fail to look at the children in the family as
gifts from allah

d) Give antonyms of the following words.
I i complete respect
 ——— positive deep

a. Develop a mind map on the importance and _role of elderly family members in a family.

b- Write a paragraph about ‘A Pakistani Wedding Ceremony’ giving full information,
observation and preparation of the whole function.

c- Explain in a paragraphs how are the marriage formalities carried on in a Pakistani family.

Teacher's Point
ia + Teacher may help the students in giving the concept of extended narrative incident writing.

In classroom discussions, a variety of linguistic exponents may be used, such as inquires, persuasion, arguments,
comparisons, evaluations in a wide range of context throughout the oral communication skills practice session.

14

--- PAGE 15 ---
Sages et UNIT 2

SHOOTING STARS

Hal Borland (Non-Fiction)

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

use pre-reading and while-reading strategies to analyze and explore different layers of
meaning read and use inference and deduction to recognize implicit meaning

read to analyze descriptive /argumentative, persuasive essays
extract salient points and develop a mind map to write informational text to understand
about meteors

respond to questions on a range of communicative purposes search for more relevant
information concerning the unit

consult general reference materials; dictionary, thesaurus for precise meaning/information
use punctuation marks correctly

understand and use noun and its kinds

interpret the use of transitional devices in writing

write informative texts to convey complex ideas, concepts of the content

--- PAGE 16 ---
Ge uric 2) SHOOTING STARS

Pre-Reading
- What do you know about a galaxy??
- How many planets are there in universe?

Most clear, dark nights you can see a shooting star, as we call it, if you keep looking.
Those shooting stars are meteors. They are points of light that suddenly appear in the sky,
like distant stars, race across the darkness, usually towards the horizon, and disappear.

For a long time, nobody knew what a meteor was but finally those who studied
stars and the sky decided that a meteor was a piece of a comet that exploded long ago.
Those piecesare still wandering about the universe in huge, looping paths that follow the
original comet's orbit. There are uncounted pieces of such comets out there in the depths
of space. Periodically clusters of them come close to the earth's orbit, or path around the
sun. Most meteors are small, probably only a few inches in diameter, but when they enter
the earth's atmosphere the friction makes them white-hot. Then they look big as stars
streaking across the darkness,

There are half a dozen meteor showers each year. Each is named after the
constellation from which it appears to come. The biggest of all, the Perseids, named for
the constellation of Perseus, occurson the 10th, 11th, and 12th of August. The next
largest, the Leonidas, named for the constellation of Leo,
comes on the nights of November 14, 15) and 16. Another, the
Andromedids, which is not quite so big, comes from November
17 to 23. There are other meteor showers in December, January,
April, May, and July, but none of them is as big as those imAugust
and November.

What are shooting stars?

Most people watching meteors will be satisfied if they see ten or twenty in an hour
of watching. On special occasions, however, the meteors seem to come in droves. The
most remarkable meteor shower 1 ever heard of was seen by a distinguished astronomer,
Professor Denison Olmstead, of New Haven, Connecticut, on the night of November 12,
1833. He was watching the Leonidas, which seem to come from directly overhead and
race downward toward the horizon in all directions. He reported that-meteors fell “like
flakes of snow. " He estimated that he saw 240, 000 meteors in nine hours that night. He
also revealed that they ranged in size from mere streaks of light to "globes of the moon's
diameter. " If he had not been a notable astronomer whose accuracy was beyond
question, such statements would seem ridiculous. But there is no reason to doubt what he
reported. He had seen one of the most unusual meteor showers ever reported. What he
watched should be called a meteor storm rather than a mere shower.

| once watched the August Perseids with an astronomer on a hilltop in an open

--- PAGE 17 ---
P unit2 | SHOOTING STARS
A i a

country, and in two hours we counted almost a thousand
meteors. That was the most | ever saw at one time. After that |
tried watching for meteors in November and the most, | ever
saw in November was about one hundred meteors in two hours
of watching.

Who is an astronomer?

The amazing thing about these meteor showers is that they come year after year.
Professor Olmstead saw all those Leonidas in November of 1833, but if you watch for
meteors this year you almost certainly will see them on the same nights that he saw them.
They will come next year, the year after that, and for countless years more. Your
grandfather saw them, and your grandchildren will see them if they look for them.

Occasionally, a meteor reaches the earth. Then it is called a meteorite and it is
valued as a sample of the vast mystery of the deep space in the sky. Scientists examine it,
try to guess what it was to begin with, where it comes from and what it is like out there.
Nobody ever learned very much from the meteorites except that they often contain a
great deal of nickel and iron,

Only a few large meteorites have struck the earth. The largest we know about, fell
in Arizona (U. S. A) many centuries ago and made what is now called Meteor Crater, a hole
about a mile across and 600 feet deep. Some Indian legends of the Southwest tell of a big
fire that fell from the sky and ate a huge hole in the earth, so this big meteorite may have
fallen since man first arrived in America, perhaps twenty-five thousand years ago.

Other big meteorites have fallen, in ancient times, in Texas (U. S. A), Argentina, northern
Siberia, South-West Africa, and in Greenland. A meteorite weighing more than thirty-six
tons was found in Greenland and now can be seen in the Hayden Planetarium in New York
City. Millions of meteors have flashed across the night sky, butonly a few large meteorites
have ever reached the earth. Never in all the centuries of written history has there been a
report of anyone being struck by a meteorite.

Post-reading

Have all the meteorites reached the earth?

--- PAGE 18 ---
[unit 2) , SHOOTING STARS

Hal Borland (1900-1978), born in Sterling, Nebraska, was a naturalist, a person who
studies animals and plants. He worked as a reporter for the Denver Post and the
Brooklyn Times. He was also a writer of documentary film scripts, radio scripts, and
other non-fiction. The National Audubon Society honored him by creating the Hal
Borland Trail in Connecticut. Borland’s essay “Shooting Stars” blends his fascination
with nature and his ability to report facts in a clear, captivating manner.

biz

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give
synonyms of each.in the given column. The first one is done for you. Also use these words

in your own sentences.
Words Meanings Ay Synonyms
horizon the line that forms the apparent boundary range of vision, skyline
between the earth and the sky
friction — the rubbing of the surface of one body
against another
droves large numbers; crowds a YO: | , ee
meteors falling stars
periodically annually, regularly
constellation system, variety, method : ” on ve nd
revealed opened, inform a a ae as 2%
ridiculous fantastic, funny Be ae San Pacis ai
perseids any group of meteors that appears annually
around August ; 3

, :

|Fnalish-11 Federal ISB Sia2 SideB Process Blankr04/20/202209S:05:23B-22

--- PAGE 19 ---
SHOOTING STARS

‘7 Reading and Critical Thinking

a. Read the unit carefully and answer the following questions.
. Define meteors?

. When do the biggest meteor showers occur?

. Describe the most unusual meteor shower ever reported.

. Give the reason of attributing so much value to meteorites.

. Explain the effect of the largest meteorite that fell to earth?

. Why do you think scientists collect meteorites? What is it about meteors
that stirs the imagination?

7. Describe the difference between a scientific explanation and an explanation
offered by a legend or myth?

8. Can.scientists learn something from legends or myths?

ou kh WwW DN =

b) Fill in the blanks with the correct option:

|. There are_____s meteor showers-each year.
a) two dozen b) one dozed c) half dozen
ii. There are points of light that suddenly in the sky.
a) disappear b) appear c) become hazy
iii. Ameteor reaches the earth
a) frequently b) occasionally c) randomly
iv. One can see a shooting star in
a) dark nights b) while raining —c) cloudy weather
v. The most remarkable meteor was seen by a distinguished
a) astrologer b) astronomer c) scientist
vi. The largest meteor fell in
a) Venezuela b) Arizona c) Atlantic Ocean

Oral Communication

+

Acronyms are words which are made up of the initial letters of a group of words. The
initial letters make a new word, which can be pronounced.

Sometimes the initials alone do not make a word which can be pronounced, so another
letter is taken from one or more of the words in the group.

--- PAGE 20 ---
funit2 | SHOOTING STARS

SUPARCO is an example of such a word. It stands for Pakistan Space and Upper
Atmosphere Research Commission.

Acronyms should not be confused with abbreviations in which each initial letter is
pronounced separately.

The following are abbreviations:
P-O-W (Prisoner of War)
Q-A-P (Old Age Pensioner)

Activity

What do the following abbreviations stand for?
U.K W.H.O

What do the following acronyms stand for?
NASA RADAR LASER

Activity

Search any incident about falling of shooting stars and share with the class.
Divide the class into small groups.

Instruct each group to prepare a presentation about shooting stars(meteors)
using the information they gathered. Each presentation should include.

Definition of meteors.

Origin of meteors.

The science behind the bright streak of light.

Information about a famous meteor shower (the perseids).
Images, diagrams (if they can arrange).

Vocabulary and Grammar

Silent Letters: A letter is silent if it is not produced. Examples include “p” in
psychiatry, the “w” in write, the “m” in mnemonic, the “h” in vehicle in more.

ho. Sb kus... 20 ee

i enalink 44 Cadaral 10D Cla? Clank Denanne Dhenk QAMAPMNTAE AE A4

--- PAGE 21 ---
(eal Fe) SHOOTING STARS
ee ee ee |

Dictionary

It is a book explaining usually in alphabetical order,
words of a language, or giving their equivalent,
reference book of words and topics of subjects
arranged in alphabetical order.

Most people think that dictionary has only one
function to describe one words’ meaning, but the
dictionary has more functiohs.

1. Usage of words, meanings, pronunciation, parts
of speech, synonyms/antonyms

Use of Dictionary

* Tolookup the meaning of an English word

* To find the English translation of a word in your language
* Tocheck the spelling of a word

* Tocheck the plural of a noun in past tens of a verb

* To find out other grammatical information about a word

* Tofind the synonym and antonym of a word

* Tocheck the part of speech of a word

* To find out how to say a word

* To find examples of the use of a word in natural language
Phonetic symbols

The pkonetic symbols used in a dictionary can be viewed in Advanced Learner's
Dictionary of Current English (6" edition);

Abbreviations and notations used: -

Abbreviations used:

Adj = adjective Vv = verb

Adv = adverb n = noun

Pp = past participle us = American pronunciation

--- PAGE 22 ---
fs unit SHOOTING STARS

* Find the given words in a dictionary and also write which part of speech they
belong to?

welfare, potential, intimate, argue, ethnicity, diverse,
* Punctuate the given lines

he was watching the leonids which seem to come from directly overhead and race
downward toward the horizon in all directions he reported that meteors fell like
flakes of snow

i

TT

Use the following phrasal verbs in sentences.
get along

cross out

see to

break down

look after

Parts of Speech

The parts of speech explain how a word is used in a sentence. There are eight main
parts of speech (also known as word classes); nouns, pronouns, adjectives, verbs,
adverbs, prepositions, conjunctions and interjections.

Noun: A noun is a word that refers to a thing (book), a person (Betty Crocker), an
animal (cat), a place (karachi), a quality (softness), an idea (justice), or an action
(walking). It's usually a single word, but not always: cake, shoes, school bus are all
nouns.

Kinds of Nouns

1. Proper Nouns.

Proper Nouns are used to refer to specific persons, places, or things. They always start
with a capital letter. These nouns also refer to the names of the days of week and
months, and also various names of organization, institution, religion, etc. Which are
proper and specific. For Example:

Quaid-e-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah

Pakistan
Mount Everest

--- PAGE 23 ---
Fs unit2 | — SHOOTING STARS
< - Te

2. Common Nouns

Proper nouns refer to general, unspecific person, place or thing. For example:

Gs a

3. Compound Nouns

Acompound noun is a noun which contains two or more words which join together to
make a single noun is called a compound noun. It can be written together, they can be
hyphenated such as “Mother-in-law” or separate words such as “Post office”.

For example

4. Collective Nouns

ACollective noun is a noun which refers to a group of people or group of something ina
specific manner or unit. Collective nouns can be either singular or plural, For example:

5. Concrete Nouns
Aconcrete noun is a noun that can be touched, smelled, seen, felt, or tasted.

Concrete nouns can be countable or uncountable, common nouns, proper nouns, or
collective nouns can be concrete noun. For example:

6. Abstract noun is a noun denoting an idea, quality or state rather than a concrete
object.

For Example:

(Cut) Carer) Crapiness)

Forming Abstract Nouns with Suffixes
Abstract nouns are frequently formed with the addition of suffixes.

--- PAGE 24 ---
F unit 2] SHOOTING STARS

Examples:

determined

determination

Examples of making abstract nouns with the suffixes are given below:
sadness, happiness

nationalism, sufism
relationship, leadership
punishment, excitement
exhaustion, friction
ity--------+--extremity, longevity

What is the difference among proper, concrete and abstract nouns? Give three
examples of each.

+ Write three examples for these following parts of speech.
Proper Noun
Common Noun
Compound Noun
Collective Noun Sennen bane
Concrete Noun eerie tnaiaaiara

Abstract Noun

Transition words are like ‘and’, ‘but’, ‘so’ and ‘because’. They show your reader the
relationship between phrases, sentences, or even paragraphs. When they are used,
they make it easier for the readers to understand how thoughts and ideas are
connected. For example: equally important, again, finally, moreover, besides and
secondly.

+ Write a paragraph on the "Benefits of Exploration of Universe”. It should have
transitional devices in it.

Teacher's Point

+ Help students in writing a paragraph with a use of transitional devices.
.- ni il 24 ae

--- PAGE 25 ---
The Wi nd (Poem)

Robert Louis Stevenson

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

read with accurate pronunciation, appropriate pitch and voice variation suitable for fictional and
nonfictional texts.

ask and answer higher-order questions to guide/assess reading(e.g., Why is the author saying this

right now? Why did the author choose this word? How is this different from what | read somewhere
else?

evaluate how authors use language, including figurative language, considering the impact on the
reader .Discuss others’ reading critically, taking account of their views.

demonstrate attentive listening’ skills while working in groups and taking turns to speak with
standard pronunciation.

summarize complex concepts, processes, or information by paraphrasing them using correct
language structure, transitional devices, own words and relevant punctuation marks.

demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written communication in
varying

use paraphrasing skills to paraphrase a poem.
use summary skills to write an objective summary of the given text and poem

write formal letters and email$ to people in extended academic (professional) environments for
various purposes

--- PAGE 26 ---
The Wind (Poem) R Robert Louis Stevenson

Pet SE A eee at ren ene SR ae oh es

Pre-Reading

+ Do you enjo wind? _ oe
* How mapsiype of wind do we feel? Name them.

(

Reading
| saw you toss the kites on high
~e And blow the birds about the sky;
And all around | heard you pass,
Like ladies’ skirts across the grass-
O wind, a-blowing all day long,
O wind, that sings so loud a song!

| saw the different things you did,
But always you yourself you hid, =f.
| felt you push, | heard you call, PA_<:
| could not see yourself at all- \ a

O wind, a-blowing all day long, ee ee rong eaten

O wind, that sings so loud a song! Stevenson was born November |
113, 1850, Edinburgh, Scotland |
{

a on December 3, 1894 at Vailima ,
sayisl, Pp

books. |
- 1

O you that are so strong and cold,
O blower, are you young or old?
Are you a beast of field and tree,
: Or just a stronger child than me?
see “4 O wind, a-blowing all day long,

4 O wind, that sings so loud a song!.

, il

ae Discuss your ideas what you have Gare)
after recitation of the poem.

--- PAGE 27 ---
ge Unit 3 The Wind (Poem) Robert Louis Stevenson

The central theme of this poem describes the power of the winds. It deals with the
sounds of the windy nights. It describes the characteristics of the wind which could
be heard but couldn't be seen.

In Robert Louis Stevenson's poem "The Wind,” the speaker discusses the power and

enigma of nature's invisible force, the wind. Throughout the poem, the wind is
personified as a dynamic and unpredictable entity. The speaker observes how the wind
affects the world—tossing kites, rustling grass, and creating sounds that mimic singing.
Despite witnessing these effects, the speaker is actually unable to see the wind itself.
The poem captures a sense of childlike wonder and curiosity, reminiscent of observing
the mysteries of the natural world in childhood. Stevenson's verse reflects the
transient and ever-changing aspects of life and emphasizes the enduring fascination
with the forces of nature.

=

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give
synonyms of each in the given column. The first one is done for you.

toss to throw or propel — into the air. ) “fling, sway
kites objects flown in the sky, often made of paper |=
and attached to strings. x

ladies’ skirts cultural and historical context. It refers to the
idea that the wind can rustle the grass in a way
that resembles the movement of women’s skirts.

invisibility a playful coinage by the poet, combining "a"
(meaning "in a state of") and "nebulous"
(meaning hazy or unclear) to describe the wind.

a-bebulous A large cemetery, especially one of elaborate
construction belonging to an ancient city

imbrifacient seems to suggest something that produces rain
or moisture.

ro a7 ; \

--- PAGE 28 ---
F unit 3 The Wind (Poem) Robert Louis Stevenson

Bg Reading and Critical Thinking

a) Answer these questions.
1. Noone can see the wind. Discuss how can we feel its presence?
2. What does blow all the day?
3. What does “you” refer to in the poem?
4. Discuss the main idea of the poem “The Wind” by Robert Louis Stevenson.
5

Analyze the meaning of the lines “Are you a beast of field and tree/ Or just a
stronger child than me”?

o

Explore the meaning of “I saw you toss the kites on high”.

What does the wind symbolize in the poem? Also evaluate its spiritual
meaning.

8. Argue the metaphorical representation of “The Wind”?

b) Choose the best answer.
i. The central theme of this poem describes :

a) the power of the winds b) spirituality
c) mystery d) emotions
ii. The poet of this poem is:
a) William Wordsworth b) Robert Louis Stevenson
c) John Keats d) William Blake

iii. The wind is personified as a:
a) dynamic and unpredictable entity _b) never-changing aspects of life
c) hardships of life

c) Figures of speech

Figures of speech such as metaphors, similes, and personification go beyond the
literal meanings of the words to give readers new insights. On the other hand,
alliterations, imageries are figurative devices that appeal to the senses of the

readers.

--- PAGE 29 ---
F unit 3 The Wind (Poem) Robert Louis Stevenson

a) Simile

Asimile is a figure of speech in which two essentially dissimilar objects or concepts
are expressly compared with one another through the use of “like” or “as. "It creates
an explicit comparison between two things that are different enough from each
other.

For example:
* Strong as an ox
* Sweet as sugar
* raining like cats and dogs
b) Metaphor
A metaphor is a comparison between two unlike things. It creates implicit
comparisons without the express use of “like” or “as. "It asserts that two things are

identical in comparison rather than similar or using specific images or concepts to
state abstract truths. For example:

* Time is money.
* There is a weight on my shoulder.
+ Laughter is the best medicine.
c) Personification
Personification is a figure of speech in which a thing - an idea or an animal - is given

human attributes. The non-human objects are portrayed in such a way that we feel
they have the ability to act like human beings. For example:

* Thesky weeps.

* The wind is whispering outside.

* My heart danced when i won the contest.
d) Apostrophe
In the context of literature and poetry, an "apostrophe" is a figure of speech in which a
speaker addresses an absent or non-human entity as if it were a person. This
rhetorical device allows the speaker to convey deep emotions, thoughts, or ideas by
directly speaking to something that cannot respond in the way a-human would.

Apostrophes are often used to add dramatic or emotional impact to a work of
literature. For example:

+ William Wordsworth's "Lines Composed a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey”
+ John Milton's “Paradise Lost”
e) Alliteration

Alliteration is a literary device or stylistic technique in which a series of words in a
sentence or phrase have the same beginning consonant sound. This repetitiort of

--- PAGE 30 ---
F units an ; The Wind (Poem) Robert Louis Stevenson

initial consonant sounds can add emphasis, rhythm, and musicality to a piece of
writing. It is often used for poetic effect or to create memorable and pleasing
language patterns. For example:

+ Peter Piper picked a peck of pickled peppers.

+ She sells seashells by the seashore.

f)Anaphora
It is repetition of a word or expression at the beginning of successive phrases, clauses,
sentences, or verses especially for rhetorical or poetic effect. For example:

+ Martin Luther King Jr.'s "| Have a Dream" speech:

* “| have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true
meaning of its creed: We hold these truths to be self-evident..."

+ In this famous speech, King uses the phrase "I have a dream" to begin several
sentences, reinforcing the central theme of hope and aspiration.

« Charles Dickens's "A Tale of Two Cities”:

“It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was
the age of foolishness..."

Dickens employs anaphora to set the tone and contrast the dualities of the novel's
setting.

g) Refrain

Arefrain is a repeated line, phrase, or group of lines in a poem, song, or piece of
literature. It serves several purposes in literature and music.For example:

* In the song “Hey Jude" by The Beatles, the line "Hey Jude, don’t make it
bad" is a refrain that is repeated throughout the song.

* In William Blake's poem “The Tyger,” the refrain “Tyger Tyger, burning bright"
is repeated at the beginning and end of each stanza, emphasizing the awe
and mystery of the tiger.

g) Symbolism

Symbolism refers to the use of representational imagery: the writer employs an
image with a deeper, non-literal meaning, for the purpose of conveying complex
ideas. In literature, symbolism is the use of a concrete image to represent an
abstract idea. For example, the heart is often employed as a symbol of love. For
example:

* An olive branch is used to symbolize a truce. ...

* Black is the symbol of death. ...

* The dove is used to symbolize peace. ...

--- PAGE 31 ---
a J : SS 4 ee 2 A EE TS a ar es SEES se

g) Hyperbole
Hyperbole is a figure of speech that involves the use of exaggeration for emphasis or
effect. It is a rhetorical device where statements are intentionally exaggerated to
emphasize a point or to create a particular effect, often for humorous or dramatic
impact. Hyperbole should not be taken literally; it's an exaggeration that is not meant
to be interpreted as a factual statement. For example:

* “I've told you a million times to clean your room.”

* "This suitcase weighs a ton!"

g) Imagery
Imagery, in a literary or poetic sense, is the author's use of description and vivid
language, deepening the reader's understanding of the work, by appealing to the
senses. Imagery: Elements of a poem that invoke any of the five senses to create a set
of mental images. Specifically, using vivid or figurative language to represent ideas,
objects, or actions: Imagery is the use of figurative language to represent the objects,
ideas, and actions in such a way that the appeals to the physical senses. Imagery
makes the use of Figurative imagery uses descriptive language that means something
different than or goes beyond the literal definition of the words, often through
exaggeration, comparison, or symbolism. (like similes, metaphors, and
personification) to appeal to all of your senses. When imagery is written well, the
reader can see, hear, taste, touch, and feel the text.For Example:

* His words felt like a dagger in my heart.

+ My head is pounding like a drum.

* The kitten’s fur is milky.
h) Irony
lrony is a situation that subverts a reader's expectations. For example:

* Our brain gives us knowledge, but we have so little knowledge about the

brain.”

* Saying “Oh great” as a response to a negative situation.
1) Antithesis
It is a literary technique that places opposite things or ideas next to one another
in order to draw out their contrast. For example:

* “lt was the best of times, it was the worst of times . . .” —Charles Dickens,

A Tale of Two Cities

1) Onomatopoeia
Onomatopoeia is a word that sounds like what it means. For example:

+ Buzz-The bee buzzed in my ear.

+ Boom-The boom of the fireworks scared the baby.

+ Meow-The cat meowed for some milk.

--- PAGE 32 ---
The Wind (Poem) Robert Louis Stevenson
oom - pow |

Task: Identify the figures of speech in the poem “The Wind”.

Analyzing Poetry:
33> 10 Steps &

1. Research the background.

3. “Analyze the title.

5. Break the structure down.

7. Analyze the imagery.

9. Visualize the setting.

i
i-a

-

32

2

10.

Read the poem aloud.

Define the meter.

Determine the poetic form.

Consider the tone & mood.

Determine the theme.

--- PAGE 33 ---
F unit 3 The Wind (Poem) Robert Louis Stevenson
ve kt Ie TL a Tide) aE SE San =}

Meter is the basic rhythmic structure of a line within a work of poetry. Meter
consists of two components:

* The number of syllables
+ Apattern of emphasis on those syllables

A line of poetry can be broken into “feet,” which are individual units within a line
of poetry. A foot of poetry has a specific number of syllables and a specific pattern
of emphasis.

Rhyme .

When we talk about a rhyme, we are referring to the repetition of a final syllable
in different words, most often at the ends of lines at certain intervals. Any given

poem may fit a rhyme scheme: a rhyme scheme describes the pattern of rhyming

sounds within a poem.
For example :

Shakespeare's famous Sonnet 18

Shall | compare thee to a summer's day?

Thou art more lovely and more temperate.
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summer's lease hath all too short a date.

If you look at the final words in each line, you may notice that lines 1 and 3 rhyme
perfectly - ‘day’ and May’. The other pair of words in lines 2 and 4 -‘temperate’ and
‘date’- on the other hand, do not appear to rhyme at all.

Task: Discuss the rhyme Scheme of the poem “The Wind”.

--- PAGE 34 ---
oo)

fg ij nts. The Wind (Poem) Robert Louis Stevenson

Intonation Pattern
* Intonation, in phonetics, the melodic pattern of an utterance. In intonation,
stress and rhythm are involved. The three main patterns of intonation in English
. are: falling intonation, rising intonation and fall-rise intonation.

* Recite the poem "The Wind" following intonation pattern.
+ Demonstrate attentive listening’ skills while listening both poems in groups and
summarize the salient points of each poem and then take turns to speak about
your views with standard pronunciation.

fransitional Device

The transitional devices are the words that show the flow of ideas to help the readers
‘| along through the text.

RFE NIN SI ET Iicogr wae ios if ristki
Emphasis Adiadition Contrast Order
mdoubt ie owing
Neverthetes« At this time
On the other hand Previousty
Nonethetens Firet/ firatly
Despite / in apite of Beoond/ secondty
In contrast (to) Thirds thirdty
Contrary to Fimalty
Whereas Subsequentiy
Definitely Atternativety Above alti
Without « doubt Conversety Before
Indeed Even «co Leet but not teest
tt should be noted Differing from and
Result Summary
pews & Brietty
im ehort
im conotusion
Te surmmertse

Reasom Condition Concessionm
Admittedty
All the seme
Up to « point
Even so
In spite of
Although/Even though
Sven it
However

--- PAGE 35 ---
F unit 3 | The Wind (Poem) Robert Louis Stevenson

Activity

a) Underline the correct transition word in the following sentences.

1. (Because, Before) it was raining, | didn't walk my dog this evening.

2. llove chocolate, (although, so) | eat chocolate candy whenever | can.

3. The test was really hard. (Therefore, Then), only five students passed it.

4. First, you have to answer the questions. (Next, So), you hand in your paper.

5. Bilal needs to goto bed early. (Although, Otherwise), he will be late for school.
. Youwillsee a big tree; (further on, however) you will see a fork in the road.

. Hereally loves reading. (Despite, In fact), he reads almost all the time.

. That would not be smart. (Despite, In other words), that would be idiotic.

oo OoOON UO

. (Over, Among) the trees of the forest, the deer ran gracefully.

10. You are always late. (On the other hand, Like), you can be trusted.

Phrasal Verbs
b. Use the following phrasal verbs in sentences.

call back

call off

calm down__’

CC __

i a ee

check out

Tam 35 Reebnpeeensh 85.

--- PAGE 36 ---
F unit 3 The Wind (Poem) Robert Louis Stevenson

+ ‘Discuss the main idea or theme of the poem” The Wind”.

+ Summarize the poem “The Wind”. Use of transitional devices will enhance the
beauty of your work.

+ Recallthe paraphrasing skills and paraphrase the second and third stanza of the
poem “The Wind”. Also use transitional devices to make it more effective.

Formal Letter

Formal Letters, refer to as commercial enterprise Letters or professional Letters, which
are written in a strict and precise layout. Formal letters can be written for some of
reasons which include,

+ Toexpress your issues at the same time as operating in a professional setup
* Toprovide reliable facts across your workspace
* Toorder items, to use for employmenty;and so forth.

- To the Editor of a newspaper addressing the problems confronted by using diverse
groups of human beings in distinct areas, and so forth.

Structure of a formal Letter

Formal letters are concerned on their structure of the letter adjustments relying on the
type of letter. Each sentence should be nicely noted out and laid down in a manner that
the message you need to convey should be particular and clean to the reader.

Types of Formal Letters

There are different types of formal letters, as discussed, and they can generally be
labeled under the following terms:

sacher's Point ;
+ Encourage students to identify and correctly use patterns of word changes that indicate different meanings or
BA parts of speech (e.g., analyze, analysis, analytical; advocate, advocacy). ~

Encdurage students to apply skimming and scanning strategies for relevant information and main points in texts
to identify the writer's purpose, and intended audience. Infer the theme/main idea of the text, distinguishing
between fact and opinion where necessary.

Ask them to summaries complex concepts, processes, or information by paraphrasing them using Correct language

structure, transitional devices, own words and relevant punctuation marks.

maa 36

— | “ rue s ‘ ms & @ Hm « ee yy nmsftrte = f= = wets! oe eee Om

--- PAGE 37 ---
f outs The Wind (Poem) Robert Louis Stevenson

* Business Letters

* Application

* Letters to Newspapers
Business Letters

Business letters should be clear and to the point. There is no room for any kind of stories
in a business letter. Before you start to write a business letter, there are a few things you
should keep in mind. ‘

+ Use simple and everyday language to convey the message clearly instead of using
flamboyant and overemphatic vocabulary.

* Avoid using abbreviations.
* The modes of address vary according to the type of letter and the receiver.

* When replying to a*business letter, always quote the date of the letter you are
responding to and its reference numbers (if any).

Formal/Business letters include letters from an employer to the employees and vice
versa, letters to order and replace goods, letters of serious concern to an officer of higher
rank, letters of complaint, etc.

Applications

Applications usually consist of letters applying for.employment. Before and after you
write a letter of application, make sure you check for the following:

+ Always start with a short introduction stating whether the applicant is writing in
response to a reference from an advertisement foundonline or in the newspaper.

« Provide the employer with a genuine expression of the applicant's earnestness in
taking up the job in the respective company.

« Also, furnish references so that the employer can gather an idea of the kind of
employee, you would be.

Letters to Newspapers

Always address these letters to The Editor’ and end with ‘Yours faithfully’. Letters to the
Editor are letters that express concerns that should be addressed to the higher
authorities. These letters should be professional and authentic.

Writing a Formal Letter - Parts of a Formal Letter

When writing a formal letter, always be respectful and conscious of your language, no

37

--- PAGE 38 ---
The Wind (Poem) Robert Louis Stevenson

matter what the subject of the letter might be. To write a formal letter, there are some
points to be remembered.

Always start with the sender's address
This is followed by the date.

The receiver's address comes next. The receiver can be the name of the firm or the
one who represents the firm.

The subject of the letter is very important. It is a statement of the purpose of the
letter. It should be written in a single line.

The salutation can be Dear Sir/Ma‘am. If it is a person you know well, you can
address them by their name, ‘Dear Sara khan’.

The body of the letter can be written in 3 paragraphs.

The first paragraph should be aimed at introducing yourself and stating the purpose
of your letter.

The second paragraph should furnish all the information about the matter.

The third paragraph can be a concluding paragraph where you lay out your
expectations regarding the matter,

To close the letter, you can
use a complimentary closing
like ‘Yours faithfully’, "Yours
sincerely’ etc.

Unlike informal letters, the
signature should include
your name (in block letters)
and designation below your
signature.

Teacher's Point

+ Encourage them to write formal letters and emails to people in extended academic (professional)
environments for various purposes.

+ Ask them to write in application or a letter to newspaper editor for practice.
+ They can use transitional devices to enhance the effectiveness of their letter.

--- PAGE 39 ---
rs unit 3] The Wind (Poem) Robert Louis Stevenson

Letter to the Editor about a road that needs repair

Ali Ahmed
House#23-B ,St#6
F-10/2, Islamabad 44000

8th September, 2023

The Editor
The News
Islamabad.

Subject: Repair of the road in Rawalpindi

Sir,

| would like to bring to your notice that the people in and around Rawalpindi have been
facing difficulties in travelling back and forth because of the bad condition of the roads
there. We have appealed to the Municipality, but there has not been any response on

the issue so far.

As our appeals to their office have had no effect, we believe that perhaps a mention in
the media would be of great help. Since the beginning of the last month, the roads in
Rawalpindi have been almost impassable. The surface is badly broken up by the heavy
rains, and on a dark night, it is positively dangerous for vehicles to pass that way.
Moreover, there are heaps of road metal on both sides of the road, which leave very
little room in the middle. The residents of the area have been inconvenienced in this
way for weeks.

The situation is becoming worse. There have been multiple accidents happening due to
this condition. | request you to highlight the seriousness of the matter in your

newspaper so that the road may be properly repaired without further delay.
Thanking You

Yours sincerely,

Us

AliAhmed

Write a letter to newspaper editor and highlight the issue of street crimes in your city.

--- PAGE 40 ---
BUTTERFLIES...

(Roger Dean Kiser)

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

analyze how an author's choices concerning how to structure specific parts of a text (e.g., the
choice of where to begin or end a story, the choice to provide a comedic or tragic resolution)
contribute to its overall structure and meaning as well as its aesthetic impact.

provide an objective summary of a range of texts including fiction, non-fiction and other types of
text add new words in glossary

evaluate the particular elements of a story or drama (e.g., how the'setting shapes the characters
or plot). Evaluate stages of plot development in a fictional text. (exposition, setting, climax,
character development, resolution)

speak confidently and fluently in a wide range of contexts, For example, (conflict resolution, panel
discussion, role-play, dialogue, etc.) to fulfil different purposes (exposition, argumentation etc.).
demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written communication in
varying degrees of complexity

comprehend and use contemporary Idioms and proverbs in the different texts and in their speech.
apply the techniques of writing the first draft with sufficient details; proofreading and editing
details to suit the purpose and audience.

write a descriptive composition (giving physical description and characteristics/traits of a
person/object/place moving from general to specific), using correct punctuation and spelling, by
using the process approach - brainstorming, mind mapping, and writing a first draft.

--- PAGE 41 ---
ot ___tertes (shor story

Pre-Reading
* Do you know what an ‘orphanage’ is?
- How can people show love and care to orphans?

Reading

There was a time in my life when beauty meant something special to me. | guess
that would have been when | was about six or seven years old, just several weeks or
maybe a month before the orphanage turned me into an old man.

| would get up every morning at the orphanage, make my bed just like the little
soldier that | had become. Then | would get into one of the two straight lines and march to
breakfast with the other twenty or thirty boys who also lived in my dormitory.

After breakfast one saturday morning |
returned to the dormitory and saw the house master
chasing the beautiful monarch butterflies that lived
by the hundreds in the azalea bushes strewn around
the orphanage.

While-reading

Why was the house master
chasing the butterflies?

| carefully watched as he caught these beautiful creatures, one after the other,
and then took them from the net and then stuck straight pins through their head and
wings, pinning them onto a heavy cardboard sheet.

How cruel it was to kill something of such beauty. | had walked many times out into
the bushes, all by myself, just so the butterflies could land on my head, face and hands so
| could look at them up close.

When the telephone
rang the house parent laid
the large cardboard paper
down on the back cement
step and went inside to
answer the phone. | walked
up the cardboard and looked
at the butterfly who he had
just pinned to the large
paper. It was still moving
about so | reached down and
touched it on the wing

--- PAGE 42 ---
Butterflies (Short story)
Al ans a le aa a eR ee ee

causing one of the pins to fall
out. It started flying around and
around trying to get away but it
was still pinned by the one wing
with the other straight pin.
Finally its wing broke off and the
butterfly fell to the ground and
just quivered.

| picked up the torn wing
and the butterfly and | spat on its
wing and tried to get it to stick
back on so it could fly away and
be free before the house parent ~
came back. But it would not stay
on him.

The next thing | knew the house parent came walking back out of the back door by
the garbage room and started yelling at me. | told him that | did not do anything but he did
not believe me. He picked up the cardboard paper and started hitting me on the top of
the head. There were all kinds of butterfly pieces going everywhere. He threw the
cardboard down on the ground and told me to pick it up and put it in the garbage inside
the back room of the dormitory and then he left.

| sat there in the dirt, by that big old tree, for the longest time trying to fit all the
butterfly pieces back together so | could bury them whole, but it was too hard to do. So!
prayed for them and then’! put them in an old torn up shoe box and buried them in the
bottom of the fort that | had built in the ground, out by the large bamboos, near the
blackberry bushes.

Every year when the butterflies would return to the orphanage and try to land on
me | would try and shoo them away because they did not know that the orphanage was a
bad place to live and a very bad place to die.

Post-reading

Why did the writer shoo the butterflies away in the next season?

--- PAGE 43 ---
F unit | Butterflies (Short story)
rae 8 ee Ne, — |

About the writer :

Roger Dean Kiser was born in Haywood, California. As a
toddler, Kiser was abandoned by his parents and
grandparents; he lived in an orphanage in Jacksonville,
Florida. He attended school in Jacksonville but only finished
up through his sixth-grade year. Kiser dropped out of seventh
grade two weeks into the school year. Despite this, he later
attended nursing school and worked as both an EMT and LPN
in Georgia, then as a medic in the U.S. Army for three years.
After working as a nurse for many years, Kiser shifted his
work and became an ammunition inspector in California before moving back to
Georgia.

Kiser’s work is inspired by his life in Jacksonville and the abuse he suffered in both
the Children’s Home Society Orphanage and the Florida Industrial School for Boys at
Marianna. He started writing because the sorrow and pain he felt due to the abuse
he suffered as a child was still such a major part of his life. Writing was difficult
because Kiser only had a sixth-grade education, but his storytelling ability shone
through. Kiser has written over 900'short stories during his career, many of which
have been published in various Chicken Soup for the Soul volumes. He has said his
favorite of his own stories is "A'D' Minus,” while the hardest to write was "The Horrors
in the White House.”

www. https: //study.com/learn/lesson/roger-dean-kiser-biography-works.html

Theme: This story is about Kiser as a boy in his orphanage that there were butterflies
there. This story is about the world through a child’s eyes and how beautiful things
look when you are a kid. Everything is clearer and prettier and everything means
more. One thing that means more when you are a kid is beauty. He is traumatized by
some experiences he has lived inside the orphanage (no love, living like a little
soldier). His only happiness is spending time with the butterflies. He does not like the
way his house parent acts.

FED SR re ro es
pi 5 Ee re eS ae “ S43

--- PAGE 44 ---
Butterflies (Short story)
te

x Five a a

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give
synonyms of each in the given column. The first one is done for you.

Words Meanings | _ Synonyms

bamboo cane

dormitory a bedroom for number of people in an institution
fort castle a
monarch king, queen, emperor

orphanage where orphans are looked after

quivered shake or vibrate slightly -
strewn scatter, sprinkle, cover

azalea flowering shrub.

“g Reading and Critical Thinking

a) Answer these questions.

Discuss the theme of the story in your own words.

At what age, did the writer go to an orphanage?

How did the orphanage turn him into an old man?

Why was the house parent chasing the beautiful butterflies?
Describe his feelings on catching butterflies.

What happened when the house parent went to attend the call?
Why was the writer putting butterfly pieces back together?

SE SF pec I

b) Choose the best answer.
ij. The writer was ______ years old when he entered in the orphanage:
a) six or seven years old b) three to four years old c) eight to nine years old

--- PAGE 45 ---
F unit 4 : Butterflies (Short story)
SSS eee ee 2 TS ee

ii. The orphanage turned him into a/an :

a) serious man b) young man c) old man

iii. The orphanage was a place to live and a very bad place to die.
a) bad b) cold c) dirty

iv. The writer the butterflies away in the next season.
a) shoo b) sent c) passed

FICTION

c) Objective summary of a range of texts SSE
including fiction, non-fiction NON-FICTION

Fiction refers to plot, settings, and characters
created from the imagination, while non-fiction
refers to factual stories focused on actual events
and people. Creating an objective summary of a Gieeuennn
range of texts, including fiction and non-fiction,
requires condensing the key points and themes
while avoiding personal opinions or interpretations.
There are some aspects in this regard:

e Identify the Texts: Begin by listing the titles and authors of the texts you want to
summarize.

e Summarize Each Text Individually:

Fiction: For fiction, briefly outline the plot, main characters, setting, and central

conflict or theme. Mention any notable stylistic elements, such as the author's

writing style or narrative structure.

b) Non-Fiction: For non-fiction, highlight the main topic or subject matter, the author's
main argument or thesis, supporting evidence or examples, and any key ideas or
conclusions.

—

e Common Themes or Patterns: If there are common themes, motifs, or patterns
across the texts, mention them. This could include shared themes like love, survival,
identity, or societal issues.

e Differences: Note any distinctive features or differences between the fiction and
non-fiction texts, such as the use of imagination and creativity in fiction versus
factual information in non-fiction.

¢ Overall Impression: Avoid personal judgments or interpretations, but you can
provide a neutral statement about the overall impression or significance of the texts.
For instance, if the texts collectively shed light on a particular historical period or
offer diverse perspectives on a specific topic, mention this.

Psp | Sines

Se ee oll 4S ital ake

--- PAGE 46 ---
Activity

Provide an objective summary of the story “ Butterflies”.

C) Elements of Short Story

a) Basic elements of astory

There are 5 elements of a story that are typically taught first in elementary school. These
story elements are:

1. Setting: Where and when is the story happening? Setting represents both the physical
location but also the time (i.e. past, present, future) and the social and cultural
conditions in which the characters exist. It can be used to create atmosphere and
mood and to influence character behavior and plot development.

2. Character: A person or animal or really anything personified. There can be one main
character or many, and they may have a background that has shaped and molded
them. Secondary characters are also important . Characters can be described in terms
of their physical appearance, personality, background, and motivations. They can
also be dynamic (changing) or static (unchanging) throughout the story.

3. Conflict: Every story must have a conflict, i.e. a challenge or problem around which

the plot is based. Without conflict, the story will have no purpose. Conflict can take
many forms, such as person vs. person, person vs. nature, person vs. society, and

person vs. self. The conflict should be well-developed and add tension and drama to
the story.

--- PAGE 47 ---
ot Butters (short story)
— amen a an te et 8 ee ee EO a

4.

Plot: The plot consists of the events that happen in the story. In a plot you typically

find an introduction, rising action, a climax, the falling action, and a resolution. Plot is
often represented as an arc. The plot is the backbone of the story and provides
structure and direction for the narrative.

‘

5. Theme: Idea, belief, moral, lesson or insight. It's the central argument that the
author is trying to make the reader understand. The theme is the “why” of the story.
Themes can be universal (applicable to all) or specific to a certain culture or time
period. They should be explored through the events of the story and can offer insights
into human behavior or the human condition.

Advanced story elements

There are 3 advanced elements of a story that are typically taught in high school. These
story elements are:

1.

Point-of-view: “Who”".is telling the story? First person (“I”) or third person
(“he/she/it"). Limited (one. character's perspective), multiple (many characters’
perspectives) or omniscient (all knowing narrator). Second person (“you”) is not
often used for writing stories. The choice of point-of-view can greatly impact the
reader's experience of the story, and.can affect how they relate to the characters and
events.

Tone: This is the overall emotional “tone” or meaning of the story. Is it happy, funny,
sad, or depressed? There are multiple ways to portray tone including through word
and grammar choices, choice of theme, imagery and description, symbolism, and
the sounds of the words in combination (i.e. rhyme, rhythm, and musicality). The
tone should be consistent throughout the story and should match the mood and
atmosphere created by the setting, plot, and characters.

Style: This is how things are said. Word choices, sentence structure, dialogue,
metaphor, simile, and hyperbole are all aspects of style. Style contributes
significantly to tone. Style can be used to create unique and memorable prose and
can help to differentiate one writer's work from another's. It can also contribute to the
tone and overall feel of the story.

Elements of short story have been introduced to you.Now you have to discuss the following
aspects of the short story “ Butterflies”:

a) Writer's point of view
b) Toneandstyle

c) Setting and plot

d) Conflict

--- PAGE 48 ---
Butterflies (Short story)

2 NSS Pea

* Make groups of students within the class and ask them to collect information on the

life cycle of a butterfly. Each group may collect information in the form of pictures
and declarative sentences.

* Speak confidently and fluently in a wide range of contexts about the conflict
resolution in.a panel discussion, role-play or dialogue about the story “Butterflies”
for argumentation which you observed in the story.

Vocabulary and Grammar

Modal verbs: An auxiliary verb like can, may, must, etc, which modifies the main verb
and expresses possibility, probability, etc.

Modal verbs are as follows:
can, must, might, ought to, would, may, should, shall, will, could

Example: (i). She can read a book. (ii)We shall go to Lahore. iii). Students may
work hard.

a) Choose the correct modal verb for each of these sentences.
+ you go already? You only arrived an hour ago!

(a) must (b) should (c) can
* When he was young, he swim very well.He won medals and championship!
(a) had to (b) can (c)could
*« Thecompany go bankrupt if they don't find a lot of money quickly!
(a) should (b) shouldn't (c) might
* You look very confused by the home work. Ali__| help you?
(a) must (b) will (c) can
Ee 48 iii

ee eee - . onc ln da et hl ee a oS 2}

--- PAGE 49 ---
f unit 4 Butterflies (Short story)

* |left my purse at home. Laila, you lend me ten dollars?
(a) may , (b) could (c) shouldn't
« It'swetand windy outside today. You_____——s go out without an umbrella.
(a) shouldn't (b) won't (c) don't have to
* | think that sign means we ____—_— enter the building. Look there's security
guard too. ‘
(a) won't (b) have to (c) mustn't

Verb: Averbis a word used to describe an action, state or occurrence. They can also
be used to describe a state of being, that's feeling something. For example:

Read, jump.

Kinds of verbs

Regular Verbs: Those verbs that form their past participle with ‘d’ or ‘ed’ are regular
verbs. These verbs do not undergo substantial changes while changing forms

between tenses. e. g., share/shared, scare/scared, want/wanted, kill/killed,
shout/shouted

Irregular Verbs: Those verbs that under-go substantial changes when changing
forms between tenses are irregular verbs. The changed forms of these verbs are

often different from the originals. e. g. , go/went/gone.
Linking Verb

A verb that acts as a link between two words is called linking verb. It connects or
links a subject to a noun or an adjective in the predicate. The most common linking
verbs are forms of the verb ‘to be’: am, is, are, was, were; being, been. For
example:-

* Hassan is excited about his promotion.

* Dreams come true when we work hard.

* All the kittens were playful.

b) Fill in the blanks with the past participle of the verb in parenthesis.
. Have you______§=_ (see) my keys? | can't find them anywhere.
* Ihavenever__________—(be) to Kashmir.
+ Wehadn't_____ (grow) tomatoes before last summer. _

--- PAGE 50 ---
P unit 4 Butterflies (Short story)
- a lc irae has es 2. ee Ae SS (} i Oo wer

* Hasshe See (shake) hands with her new friend yet?
* Theyhaven't_____—=—————s (Speak) in years.
* Hashe (sell) his car yet?

c) Fillin the blanks with the linking verbs.
« You very foolish to believe her.
* They be happy ever after.
* He CO in his hands.
* The police department getting tough on crime.

Idioms and proverbs

expression that
contains a figurative
meaning

Teilelasiuelemele) '
k

contain 8 Moral

ms are pnrases
ot complete
Ssentencs
L

‘Tree whee Pee | ORR RRR R ERE SESS ES.

,
' .
{idioms do not make ie sie
sense, if you aren yt
familiar Witn it
re ba Weare, tA eee Sat) 50 OF LL CEE ee er ae Te
easktee s bt ae aaa 1 aot Re ST en iy eS Geen Pk RT RTI “ee

English-11 Federal ISB Sig4 SideB Process Blagki4/20/2022028-25-99:59

--- PAGE 51 ---
fF unit4 | Butterflies (Short story)

Idioms

Meaning —SSC*d

A blessing in disguise |a good thing that seemed bad at as part of a sentence
first

Beat around the bush |avoid saying what you mean, usually /as part of a sentence
because it is uncomfortable

Better late than never |better to arrive late than not to by itself
come at all

Call ita day — stop working on something

Hang in there don't give up by itself as part of a
sentence
Make a long story short |tell something briefly

Time flies when you're |you don't notice how long something |by itself
having fun lasts when it’s fun

Proverbs
Actions speak louderthan words —_|what you dois more important than what you say

i ins|you must begin something if you hope to finish it;
something that takes a long time to finish begins
with one step

li good things must come to anend jeverything ends; good times don't last forever
Apicture is worth a thousand words |animage can tell a story better than words

if you're in a bad situation and someone offers to
help you, you have to take whatever they give you
and shouldn't ask for more

Beauty is in the eye of the beholder [what is “beautiful” is different for each person

irds of a feather flock together people who are similar spend time together

Cleanliness is next to godliness it's good to be clean. God is clean, and you should
be too.

Don't bite the hand that feeds you [don’t make someone angry or hurt someone who is
helping you or paying for you

.
‘.

<=
aS
= 8,
“ o
a3
4
ra
a
2
j
a

>

pemen i

--- PAGE 52 ---
F unit | Butterflies (Short story)
Activity

Use the given idioms and proverbs in your sentences .You can use them in your
daily routine writing or in discussion as well.

d) Phrasal Verbs
Use the following phrasal verbs in sentences.
clean up

come across

come apart
come from

cut down

cut off

A descriptive essay is one which Is used In order to describe something. These essays
WHATISA can describe anything from a person or place to an item or idea. The idea of the
descriptive essay Is to give the author a chance to hone their writing skills by way of
DESCRIPTIVE description. On top of this, the descriptive essay is a great chance for the author to
use their creative skills - the more vivid the description, the more the reader con
ESSAY? picture clearly what is being talked about. This means that the writer should employ

all their skills to paint.on image for the audience.

ideas for Descriptive Essay Topics

The hardest part of descriptive essays is coming up with a topic. Just remember that you

can quite literally describe anything as long as you yourself find it interesting enough to
write about. That might include:

« Along nature hike through beautiful surroundings -
« Your favorite sport or a specific game/match that was memorable:
+ Your most recent birthday and all the things that have shaped you in the past

“) matin 44 Eadaent 1OD Cind CidnA Deanace Monk M40APINIAEAE-OR-99

--- PAGE 53 ---
fs unita | Butterflies (Short story)

+ Acountry or city, broken down into geography, climate, politics, religion, and
culture

+ Ahistorical event, including its causes, ramifications, and consequences

+ Anews story that includes context about the people involved, information about
where it occurred, and insight into other events it links to

General Format and Structure of a Descriptive Essay

There isn't a set format for descriptive essays. You describe your own approach that how

do you experience things, and it turns out that we all experience and see things
differently?

Agood outline structure that you can start with might look like this.

Introduction
* Write a clue that helps your reader relate to the senses you're tapping into.
* Provide some general background about the thing you're describing.

+ Form a thesis statement that makes a claim (but may not necessarily include
an argument or opinion). .

Body paragraph: Physical Description
' * Provide a topic sentence introducing the subject.
+ Give an in-depth physical description of the subject.
Body paragraph: Contextual Description

* Describe your subject within its given context, like its physical surroundings or
temporal environment.

Body paragraph: Emotional Description

. Describe ,how the subject emotionally or mentally affected those. who
interacted or experienced it.

Conclusion

* Restate your thesis about the subject's description.
Activity:
Describe the character sketch of the writer in the story ‘Butterflies’.

--- PAGE 54 ---
Butterflies (Short story)
cules Sar as Le SE EN

Proof reading a text means omitting errors from the text and making it error-free.
Proof-reading may consist of capitalizing letters, adding a period, adding a question
mark, add a comma, taking a word out, spelling correctly, indenting, ,/ lower case
letter, * add symbols and apostrophe (').

Proof Read

Proof read the given text carefully and rewrite it in the given space.
spaghetti dinner

Last night my father made us Spaghetti dinner. He makes the best meat balls in the world!
| ate a lot of spaghetti, My brother spill sauces on his white shirt. Whee all laughed. | love
it when my dad make spaghetti.

characteristics/traits of a person/object/place moving from general to specific), using correct
punctuation and spelling, by using the process approach - brainstorming, mind mapping, and writing a
first draft.

+ Ask them apply the techniques of writing the first draft with sufficient details such as proofreading and
editing details to suit the purpose and audience.

mm Encourage students to write a descriptive composition (giving physical description and

--- PAGE 55 ---
Clean water and Sanitation

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

* respond to texts for different purposes (including arguments and discussions).
* use complex questions for a range of audiences increase vocabulary.
* analyze organizational patterns in a text:
a. list/ sequence of ideas/ events comparison-contrast
b. cause-effect
c. problem-solution
d. reasons/ assumptions-conclusion
* engage in extended discussions and critique taking into account other speakers’ viewpoints and
presenting one’s own with clarity.
+ identify and correctly use patterns of word changes that indicate different meanings or parts
of speech (e.g., analyze, analysis, analytical; advocate, advocacy).
* distinguish between the connotative and denotative meanings of words, both similar and
dissimilar denotations and their appropriate use in a variety of writing and texts.
* develop précis writing skills. Write précis effectively.
* write multiple paragraphs essays/stories; multi-stanza poems or playscript using mechanics of
correct writing.
* write formal letters and emails to people in extended academic (professional) environments

for various purposes

--- PAGE 56 ---
Funit 5 Clean water and Sanitation

Pre-Reading
+ Why is access to clean water and sanitation important?

- Discuss the main challenges in achieving clean water and sanitation
worldwide

Reading

Ensure access to water and sanitation for all

Access to safe water, sanitation and hygiene is the most basic human need for health and
well-being. Billions of people will lack access to these basic services in 2030 unless
progress quadruples. Demand for water is rising owing to rapid population growth,
urbanization and increasing water needs from agriculture, industry, and energy sectors.
The demand for water has outpaced population growth, and half the world’s population is
already experiencing severe water scarcity at least one month a year. Water scarcity is
projected to increase with the rise of global temperatures as a result of climate change.
Investments in infrastructure and sanitation facilities; protection and restoration of
water- related ecosystems; and hygiene education are among the steps necessary to
ensure universal access to safe and affordable drinking water for all by 2030, and
improving water-use efficiency is one key toreducing water stress.

There has been positive progress. Between 2015 and 2022, the proportion of the world's

population with access to safely managed drinking water increased from 69 per cent to 73
per cent.

Why?
Access to water, sanitation and hygiene is a human right. To get back on track, key
strategies include increasing sector-wide investment and capacity-building, promoting

innovation and evidence-based action, enhancing cross-sectoral coordination and
cooperation among all stakeholders, and adopting a more integrated and holistic

approach to water management.
Water is essential not only to health, but also to poverty

reduction, food security, peace and human rights,

ecosystems and education.

Nevertheless, countries face growing challenges linked to What do you mean by
water scarcity, water pollution, degraded water-related \ sanitation and hygiene?
ecosystems and cooperation over transboundary water

What are the challenges? ,

In 2022, 2.2 billion people still lacked safely managed drinking water, including 703

basins.

--- PAGE 57 ---
ruts: Clean water and Sanitation
5 ee (EE Se a ed

million without a basic water service; 3.5 billion people lacked safely managed
sanitation, including 1.5 billion without basic sanitation services; and 2 billion lacked a
basic hand washing facility, including 653 million with no hand washing facility at all.

By managing our water sustainably, we are also able to better manage our production of
food and energy and contribute to decent work and economic growth. Moreover, we can
preserve our water ecosystems, their biodiversity, and take action on climate change.

Are water and climate change inter-linked?

Water availability is becoming less predictable in many places. In some regions, droughts
are exacerbating water scarcity and thereby negatively impacting people's health and
productivity and threatening sustainable development and biodiversity worldwide.
Ensuring that everyone has access to sustainable water and sanitation services is a critical
climate change mitigation strategy for the years ahead.

Without better infrastructure and management,
millions of people will continue to die every year from
water-related diseases such asmalaria and diarrhoea,
and there will be further losses in biodiversity and Give your suggestions on
ecosystem resilience, undermining prosperity and improving the drinking
efforts towards a more sustainable water quality for everyone.

What can we do?

Civil society organizations should work to keep governments accountable, invest in water
research and development, and promote the inclusion of women, youth and indigenous
communities in water resources governance.

Generating awareness of these roles and turn- ing them into.action will lead to win-win
results and increased sustainability and integrity for both human and ecological systems.

You can also get involved in the World Water Day campaign that aims to provide
| information and inspiration to take action on hygiene issues.

Post-reading

Who can invest in water
research and overall
development?

DUE TO SEVERE
CHILD DEATH PIARRHE ja
IN. THE WORLD ARE IN INDIA

DUE TO GEVERE

DEATH IN 2015

--- PAGE 58 ---
Clean water and Sanitation

Facts and figures Goal 6 Target

« Despite great progress, billions of | 6.1 By 2030, achieve universal and
people still lack access to safe equitable access to safe and affordable
drinking water, sanitation and drinking water for all

hygiene. Achieving universal 6.2 By 2030, achieve access to
coverage by 2030 will require a adequate and equitable sanitation and
substantial increase in current hygiene for all and end open _

global rates of progress: sixfold defecation, paying special attention to

for drinking water, fivefold for the needs of women and girls and those
sanitation and threefold for in vulnerable situations

hygiene. . 6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by

+ Water use efficiency has risen by 9 | reducing pollution, eliminating dumping
per cent, but water stress and and minimizing release of hazardous
water scarcity remain a concern in | chemicals and materials, halving the
many parts of the world. In 2020, | proportion of untreated wastewater and
2.4 billion people lived in water- | substantially increasing recycling and
stressed countries. The challenges safe reuse globally
vr compounded by conflicts and 6.4 By 2030, substantially increase
climate change. water-use efficiency across all sectors

+ Key strategies to get Goal 6 back | and ensure sustainable withdrawals and
on track include increasing sector- | supply of freshwater to address water
wide investment and capacity- scarcity and substantially reduce the

building, promoting innovation number of people suffering from water
and evidence- based action, scarcity

enhancing cross-sectoral 6.5 By 2030, implement integrated
coordination and cooperation water resources management at all
among all stakeholders, and levels, including through transboundary
adopting a more integrated and cooperation as appropriate

holistic epproscty to water 6.6 By 2020, protect and restore water-
management; related ecosystems, including

* Only 0.5 per cent of water on mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers,
Earth is useable and available aquifers and lakes

freshwater oth 6.A By 2030, expand international

wa cooperation and capacity-building
ee a support to developing countries in
rgani

_ | water- and sanitation-related.activities
Limiting global warming to 1.5°C

--- PAGE 59 ---
compared to 2°C would
approximately halve the
proportion of the world population
expected to suffer water scarcity,
although there is considerable
variability between
regions. Chapter 8: Water Cycle
Changes (p. 1063)

The global urban population facing
water scarcity is projected to
double from 930 million in 2016 to
1.7-2.4 billion people in 2050.

Despite progress, 2.2 billion
people still lacked safely managed

drinking water services, 3.5 billion
lacked safely managed sanitation
services, and 2.0 billion lacked
basic hygierie services in 2022

Surface water bodies, such as
lakes, rivers, and reservoirs, are
undergoing rapid global changes,
with one in five river basins
showing high fluctuations in
surface water levels in the past 5
years

Water pollution poses a significant
challenge to human health and
the environment in many
countries.

"Rae 59

dS eed Bel a a!

Clean water and Sanitation
LS Sn aa

and programmes, including water
harvesting, desalination, water
efficiency, wastewater treatment,
recycling and reuse technologies

6.B Support and strengthen the
participation of local communities in
improving water and sanitation
management

--- PAGE 60 ---
routs _ Clean water and Sanitation

bi

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give
synonyms of each in the given column. The first one is done for you.

Words Meanings RN a
scarcity lack, shortness of supply dearth
sanitation the process of keeping places free

from dirt, infection, disease, etc., by
removing waste, trash and garbage, by
cleaning streets, etc.

infrastructure he system of public works of a country,
state, or region.

predictable capable of being predicted.

sustainable the ability to maintain or support a
process continuously over time
resilience the process and outcome of

successfully adapting to difficult or
challenging life experiences,
especially through mental, emotional,
and behavioral flexibility and
adjustment to external and internal

demands.
quadruple consisting of four parts or elements,
control, a nation, a person, an activity, one's
administration desires, etc.; direction, rule;
regulation.

g Reading and Critical Thinking

a) Answer these questions.
1. Discuss the effects of drinking unclean water and bad sanitation on communities.
2. Why is demand for clean water rising day by day?
3. How can dirty water be purified? Describe in detail the procedure to purify
dirty water.
4. Describe the adverse affects of unclean water and bad sanitation on
communities and regions?

5. What role does water play in sustainable development and environmental
conservation?

--- PAGE 61 ---
F units Clean water and Sanitation

6. How does climate change impact access to clean water and sanitation?

7. What are the economic implications of investing in clean water and sanitation
infrastructure?

8. How can technology and innovation play a role in improving access to clean water
and sanitation?

9. Explore the way of purifying the contaminated water.
10. Identify the health issues caused by drinking unclean water.

b) Complete the blanks with suitable words.
i. Access to. safe water, sanitation and hygiene is the most

human need for health: and ‘

ii. Demand for water is rising owing to population growth,

urbanization and increasing water needs from , industry, and
"energy sectors.

iii. Wateris__- =~ —__not only to health, but also to poverty reduction,
food security, _and human rights, ecosystems and education.

iv. We can our water ecosystems, their , and
take action on climate change.

v. Civilsociety_ = = Should work to keep governments
accountable, in water research and development, and promote
the of women, youth and indigenous communities in water
resources governance.

_ ¢) Patterns of organization ina paragraph

Patterns of organization refer to the different structures or frameworks that writers use
to organize information within a paragraph or text. These patterns help readers

understand the cases ce between ideas and follow the author's argument or
narrative. = : ) é

--- PAGE 62 ---
Unit 5 Clean water and Sanitation
Activity

Make a mind map of the text according to the organizational pattern given above and
summarize the article 'Clean water & sanitation’.

Extended Discussions

Extended discussions refer to in-depth conversations or dialogues that explore a specific
topic, issue, or subject matter in detail. These discussions often involve the exchange of
ideas, arguments, and information among individuals or groups.

Make some groups in the class engage in extended discussions and critique taking into
account other speakers’ viewpoints and presenting one's own with clarity on basic
priorities of spending a healthy life. Each group may discuss the given topics and note
the important points. The presentation of peers may be in front of the class. Effective
speaking style may be followed to present on health issues.

Vocabulary and Grammar

Kinds of verb:

Transitive Verb: A transitive verb always has a noun that-receives the action of the
verb. For example: ;

Ali gave Osama the pencil.

Laiba raises her hand.

intransitive Verb: An intransitive verb never has a direct or indirect object. For
example:

The girls sleep.

He died in an accident.

Finite Verb

Finite verbs mean those verbs which can change their form in accordance with the
subject. It defines the time (past or present) and the subject. For example:

leat rice. / He eats rice. / They eat rice.

lamastudent. / He is astudent. / They are students.

ceemeaniemeeinnmacis ilk

--- PAGE 63 ---
Clean water and Sanitation

Infinite Verb

An infinite is a verb which has “to” before it. It shows infinite action when it is used
at the beginning of the sentence. For example:

To see is to believe.
To be weak is miserable.

a) Decide whether the verbs in bold are transitive or intransitive
. The girlwas crying all day long.
. We showed her the photo album.
. It was raining at that time.
. Mother gave a cookie to the child.
. The doctor advised me to exercise regularly.
6. | ate the cherries.
b) Choose which verb is finite or infinite.
1. My little brother ‘wants’ to be an actor.

uk WwW Dd =

a- finite b- infinite
2. She worked hard ‘to pass’ the test.
a- finite b- infinite

3. | couldn't solve the problem.
a- finite b- infinite
4. To error is human.
a- finite b- infinite
c) Denotation and Connotation

Denotation

Denotation refers to the literal, dictionary definition of a word. It is the explicit,
objective meaning that a word carries. It is the most basic and straightforward
meaning of a word, devoid of any emotional or cultural associations.

For example, the denotation of the word “snake” is a long, legless reptile.
Connotation:

Connotation, on the other hand, involves the emotional, cultural, or social
associations and implications that a word carries beyond its literal definition.

--- PAGE 64 ---
fs units | . : Clean water and Sanitation

Connotations can be positive, negative, or neutral, and they often depend on
individual or societal experiences and perceptions.

For example, the word "snake" may have connotations of deceit or danger due to
cultural and symbolic associations.

Examples:
“Home”
+ Denotation: Aplace where one lives; a residence.

+ Connotation: Warmth, comfort, safety, and a sense of belonging. It often carries
positive emotions and attachments.

"Snake"

+ Denotation: Along; legless reptile that slithers and often has a venomous bite.

+ Connotation: Negative connotations are often associated with "snake" due to its use
- aS a metaphor for deceit or betrayal. However, in some cultures, snakes may also
symbolize healing or transformation.

Activity

For each word or phrase, identify its denotation (literal meaning) and then provide
its connotation (emotional, cultural, or subjective associations). Use the context
and your own understanding to determine the connotation.

Word/Phrase:

--- PAGE 65 ---
F cunit 5, | Clean water and Sanitation

e) Use the following phrasal verbs in sentences.
cut out

dress up

drop back

drop off
drop out
end up

Précis writing

Précis writing is a valuable skill that involves summarizing a longer text while retaining
its essential meaning and main points. It requires concise and precise writing,
eliminating unnecessary details and maintaining clarity. Here are some steps and tips
for improving your precis writing skills:

1. Read Actively: Carefully read the original text, paying close attention to its main
ideas, arguments, and supporting details.

2. Understand the Text: Ensure that you have a thorough understanding of the text's
central message and key points.

3. Highlight Key Points: Identify the most important ideas, arguments, examples, and
evidence presented in the text. These will form the basis of your précis.

4. Create an Outline: Organize your thoughts by creating a brief outline. This outline
should include the main headings or topics that you plan to cover in your précis.

5. Write a Thesis Statement: Craft a clear and concise thesis statement that
summarizes the main message or argument of the text. This statement will guide your
précis.

6. Start Writing: Begin writing your précis by paraphrasing the thesis statement in
your own words. This will serve as your opening sentence.

7. Focus on Clarity: Write clearly and concisely, using your own words to convey the
text's main ideas. Avoid jargon or overly complex language.

--- PAGE 66 ---
tunics Clean water and Sanitation

8. Eliminate Unnecessary Details: Omit any minor or less relevant details that do not
contribute to the core message of the text.

9. Maintain Proper Structure: Follow a logical structure, typically starting with an
introductory sentence, followed by the main points, and concluding with a summary of
the text's conclusion or final thoughts.

10. Check for Accuracy: Ensure that your précis accurately represents the original
text's meaning and intent.

11. Edit and Revise: Review your précis for clarity, grammar, and punctuation errors.
Make any necessary revisions to improve its overall quality.

12. Keep it Within the Word Limit: If there is a specified word limit for your precis,
ensure that you stay within that limit while still conveying the text's key information.
13. Practice Regularly: Like any skill, précis writing improves with practice. Regularly
practice summarizing different types of texts to sharpen your skills.

14. Seek Feedback: Share your précis with others for feedback and constructive
criticism. This can help you identify areas for improvement.

15. Compare with the Original Text: After writing your précis, compare it with the
original text to ensure that you have captured its essence accurately.

Example:

world, through emails, social media, and video calls. | personal touch.of face-to-face
This transformation has made our lives more interactions, leading to
convenient and efficient, but it also comes with misunderstandings. Furthermore,

challenges. Digital communication lacks the personal| constant connectivity poses
touch of in-person conversations, leading to mental health challenges. In
misunderstandings and misinterpretations. Moreover, |summary, while tech advances
the constant connectivity can be overwhelming, enhance communication, we
affecting our mental well-being. In conclusion, while |must address its drawbacks.
technology has brought incredible advancements in

communication, we must also be mindful of its

|English-11 Federal ISB Sig5 SideB Process Blanls4/20/2024025-05-23-22

--- PAGE 67 ---
fF units Clean water and Sanitation
rie ne - 45 ACR a a Te ES eS ay. a a ee
Activity

Précis the given passage effectively using précis writing skill.

In a rapidly changing world, adaptability has become a crucial skill. Whether in one's
career, personal life, or even survival, the ability to adapt to new circumstances and
challenges is paramount. Adaptable individuals are not just resilient; they thrive in
uncertainty. They can adjust their strategies, learn new skills, and embrace change with
enthusiasm.

Adaptability is not about mere survival; it's about growth. Those who embrace change as
an opportunity to learn and improve are the ones who succeed in the long run. They are
like bamboo, bending with the wind but never breaking.

In essence, adaptability is the key to innovation and progress. It fosters creativity and
encourages exploration. It allowsus to break free from the constraints of the familiar and
discover new horizons. In a world that is constantly evolving, adaptability is the secret to
staying relevant and achieving lasting success.

Writing Mechanics

In writing, mechanics and conventions are rules and systems for how things should
be written down in order to ensure that what ends up on the page is what one means
to express. Areas that are governed by mechanics and conventions include grammar,
punctuation, spelling, and capitalization. )

Rendering
Activity 3 = =a
Write an essay using mechanics of — ,
sot [Veg a ear aaaan|
correct writing on “Global Warming purpoes fr writing | ot
and its effects on Earth”. —

Teacher's Point Ce
* Fororal activity give topics to the students for discussion. Help them in preparation. ‘
pA * Encourage students to distinguish between the connotative and denotative meanings of words, both
similar and dissimilar denotations and their appropriate use in a variety of writing and texts.
* Motivate them to develop precis writing skills and to write précis effectively.
+ Ask them to write multiple paragraphs essays/stories; multi-stanza poems or play script using mechanics
of correct writing. Encourage them to use transitional devices as well to enhance the topic’s details.

--- PAGE 68 ---
F units . Clean water and Sanitation

Email Writing

Writing professional emails in the workplace

What is email communication?

Electronic mail (e-mail) is a computer-based application for the exchange of messages

between users. A worldwide e-mail network allows people to exchange e-mail messages
very quickly.

Essential email components
Subject line
The subject line of your email should offer your reader the purpose of the email, but it

should also be brief. If your subject line is vague, people may ignore your email, or it may
be sent to the junk/spam folder.

Greeting
Choosing a greeting may appear to be an easy task, but you have to select the appropriate
level of formality. Emailing a coworker with whom you are friends to ask a brief question

is different from emailing your supervisor with a work-related request. Below are some
greetings that straddle different levels of formality:

More formal:

- Dear [Name],

Hello [Name],

Good morning/afternoon [Name],

Less formal:

Hi [Name],

Hey [Name],

Body

Depending on how your audience will react to the information in your email, you will
need to decide whether to structure your email body using the direct or indirect method
of communication. Either way, paragraphs in an email, when there is more than one,

should be clear and concise. They are generally much shorter than paragraphs in an
academic essay, for example.

Closing paragraph - summary, action items, polite closing
Sign-off ,

As with the greeting, you need to choose an appropriate sign-off for your audience:

--- PAGE 69 ---
Clean water and Sanitation

More formal:
« Sincerely,
* Thanks/Thank you,
* Best,
« Allthe best,
* Bestregards,
* Kindregards
Less formal:

* Talksoon —

* Cheers,
. See you,
* The Direct Method of Communication

To:

Subject : Your exclusive Premium subscription discount
vegesslll j pti

mm introduction
Hi, John, .

Thank you for being our loyal customer for over five years. We at
(Company Name) really appreciate your commitment to our product,
80 to celebrate this, we've granted you a 70% discount on your yearly
Premium subscription.

Use code JOHNDOE at checkout. Closing

(Company Name) team

Write an email to your bank manager and inform him that your cheque book's
leaves have been finished . You have to request him to issue your 50 leaves
cheque book immediately. .

Teacher's Point
* Encourage them to write formal letters and emails to people in extended academic (professional)
environments for various purposes.

69

--- PAGE 70 ---
© The Darkling Thrush (Poem)

Thomas Hardy

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

* ask and answer higher-order questions to guide/assess reading(e.g., Why is the author saying
this right now? Why did the author choose this word? How is this different from what | read
somewhere else?

* use pre-reading and while-reading strategies to analyse and explore different layers of meaning
within texts including biases and opinions.

* evaluate the particular elements of a story or drama (e.g., how the setting shapes the
characters or plot).

* Identify rhyme schemes and figurative language in poems

* evaluate two or more central ideas of a text and analyze their development over the course of
the text, including how they interact and build on one another to provide a complex analysis.

* demonstrate attentive listening’ skills while working in groups and taking turns to speak with
standard pronunciation.

* comprehend and use contemporary Idioms and proverbs in the different texts and in their
speech.

* identify and use adjectival, prepositional and adverbial phrases in reading and writing tasks.

* use paraphrasing skills to paraphrase a poem.

* tse summary skills to write an objective summary of the given text and poems

--- PAGE 71 ---
Pre-Reading

The Darkling Thrush (Poem)
hl lh al

* Guess theme of the poem after reading the poem?
* Name any other poem of Thomas Hardy that you have read.

Reading

| leant upon a coppice gate
When Frost was spectre-grey,

And Winter's dregs made desolate
The weakening eye of day.

The tangled bine-stems scored the sky
Like strings of broken lyres,

And all mankind that haunted nigh
Had sought their household fires.

The land's sharp features seemed to be
The Century's corpse out leant;

His crypt the cloudy canopy,
The wind his death-lament.

The ancient pulse of germ and birth
Was shrunken hard and dry,

And every spirit upon earth
Seemed fervourless as |.

At once a voice arose among
The bleak twigs overhead
In a full-hearted evensong
Of joy illimited;
An aged thrush, frail, gaunt, and small,
In blast-beruffled plume,
Had chosen thus to fling his soul
Upon the growing gloom.

So little cause for carolings
Of such ecstatic sound

Was written on terrestrial things
Afar or nigh around,

That | could think there trembled through
His happy good-night air

Some blessed Hope, whereof he knew
And | was unaware.

* What seemed good-night favorite
like him?

Thomas Hardy He was a novelist
and poet, born on 2 June 1840,
and died on 11 January 1928. He
was a Victorian realist, following in
the footsteps of George Eliot. In
his novels and poetry, he was a
strong advocate. of Romanticism,
particularly William Wordsworth's
poetry. He was strongly critical of
much of Victorian society,
particularly the degradation of
Britain's rural people, particularly
those from his home county of
South West England.

* Discuss the ideas you
imagined after reciting
this poem.

* What did tremble through air?

--- PAGE 72 ---
a __ The Darkling Thrush (Poem)

Theme: The main topic of The Darkling Thrush’ is the hopelessness of modern
temperament. In the poem, Hardy describes the death of an old world ina lyrical and
descriptive way, but he cannot replace it with a new one. Something is finished,
everything has changed, civilization is gone, and he does not know what is going to
replace it. At first glance, the poem seems to be about change, the passage of time,
and seeing things from a different point of view. In The Darkling Thrush’, Thomas
Hardy portrays nature as uninterested in the existence of humanity and it is
sufferings. The tragedy of the nineteenth century is the loss of hope due to the lack of
faith in any other positive force.

Summary: The ‘Darkling Thrush’ is a poem written by Thomas Hardy on December
31st, 1900, the final day of the nineteenth century. The poem is about the despair and
hopelessness of the final days of the nineteenth century and the uncertainty of the
twenty-first century. The speaker describes a bleak winter landscape, with cold and
frost, and the barrenness of the land. The speaker mourns the cruetness of this season
and the emptiness of the world. Inthe midst of this bleak landscape, the speaker
hears the singing of a thrush perched oma twisted tree. It is a strange and unexpected
sound to hear in such a bleak environment, but the thrush’s song is filled with joy and
vitality. The speaker is touched by the bird's resilience and the hope it brings to the
world, even in the darkest of times. In the last tine of the poem, the speaker ponders
what the thrush’s song means to him. He understands that the bird's song is a sign of
hope. It is a sign of life's resilience, a sign of hope in a world that is so dark and
uncertain. The poem concludes with the speaker recognizing that the thrush is a
symbol of hope and optimism.

©

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give
synonyms of each in the given column.

bine-stems shoots from a climbing plant.
blast-beruffled feathers which have been made to stand
plume up(been ruffled)by the wind (blast)

opp nr ee ess = ee

72 a le a eed Dt

--- PAGE 73 ---
F unite | The Darkling Thrush (Poem)

carolling sounds, singing songs.

coppice an area of densely growing small trees.

death-lament = sorrowful sounds(such as the willing that
takes place when somebody dies )

desolate dismal and gloomy

dregs the last remaining and least attractive
part of something (here ,the Winter and
the Century )

fervourless without any intensity of emotion or
belief; cold

gaunt thin and bony

illimited unlimited ,without limits

lyre a stringed musical instrument

nigh near in place or time

outlean spread out

spectre a ghostly presence

terrestrial of the earth (not the air)

1° B

Reading and Critical Thinking

Answer these questions.
1. How does the poet describe the winter?
How is the song of the thrush described?
Which old-fashioned words are used in the poem?
Do you find the poem gloomy? Is there a note of hope in it? Discuss.

Find out the symbolic significance of the bird in Thomas Hardy's "The
Darkling Thrush.”

What are examples of imagery used in "The Darkling Thrush”?

How does the speaker feel about the season in “The Darkling Thrush”?
How does the thrush change the mood of the poem?

Discuss the tone of the poem.

10. Which words does the poet use to depict the bird’s strength in third
stenza?

yk wn

we SS

ER
72 a ae

--- PAGE 74 ---
F unite] The Darkling Thrush (Poem)

b) Choose the best answer.

i. The central theme of this poem describes :
a) spirituality b) hopelessness of modern temperament
c) bird's life d) pessimism

ii. The poet of this poem is :
a) Thomas Hardy b) Robert Louis Stevenson
c) William Blake d) John Keats

iii. The tragedy of the nineteenth century isthe ___—==—=s———S dt’ to thee lack ff

faith in any other positive force.: .

a) loss of strength b) loss of hope c) loss of emotions

Intonation: Intonation is a variation of spoken pitch in linguistics that isn't used to
distinguish words. Instead, it's used to indicate the speaker's attitude and emotions, to
tell the difference between statement and question, and to differentiate between
different types of question, to focus attention on important parts of the spoken
message, and to regulate conversation. This is in contrast to tone, which in some
languages uses pitch variation to distinguish words, either word-by-word or sentence-
by-sentence (yes/no question, request for repetition, greeting, etc.). In this example,
the main movement of the sentence is still at the tone of the Tonic, but this time, the
voice descends on the Tonic, then rises. You use this pattern to aan questions that
require an answer of "Yes" or "No".

| bought some food. Did you buy some food?
| saw a burglar. Did you see a burglar?
Practice these dialogues.

Yes/No questions

Are you alone?

Can! come in?

May | sit down?

Are you sure?
Greetings

A: Hello, Faiza!

B: Good morning, Doctor.
Requests for repetition

What did you say?

When did all this happen?

Which pills did you take?

How did you get in?

--- PAGE 75 ---
F unit | a The Darkling Thrush (Poem)
Activity

Search any other poem of Thomas Hardy and recite it in the class following the
intonation pattern.

Cc) In unit 3,figurative language is discussed in detail.Now find the figures of speech
in the poem ‘The Darkling Thrush’.

d) Elements of Poetry

RHYME
Words have the

--- PAGE 76 ---
F unite — | The Darkling Thrush (Poem)

Activity: Discuss the tone of the poem.

Find the rhyme scheme and meter in the poem.

xe Oral Communication
is

Active Listening Skills

When you are listening to someone, it is important to pay attention to what they are
saying. Intonation is a way of changing the pitch of a speech, but it is not used to tell the
difference between words. It is used to show the speaker's attitude and emotions, which
helps people understand each other better. If you listen carefully, you will be able to get a
better understanding of what the speaker is trying to say and: how to respond. You can
show that you are paying attention by making eye contact, shaking your head, or leaning
forward.

Activity: You can practice your listening and speaking skills through these activities:
Have a casual conversation with someone (this could be a friend, classmate,
family member, etc.)

Listen to a podcast (you could also take notes while listening)
Practice speaking in a mirror - it may seem strange to talk to yourself, but it can

help prepare you for conversations with other people or presentations
Read aloud - this will help you to pace yourself and speak clearly
Listen to famous speeches to examine changes in tone, pitch, and intonation

--- PAGE 77 ---
a) Idioms

E

Spill the beans to give away a secret

it's up to you

to play a practical joke

to be loyal no matter what

The ball is in your court
Pull someone's leg
Through thick and thin
Once in a blue moon

Take it with a pinch of salt
“I've got it in the bag”
Cold feet

H

7
'

don't take it too seriously
secured success
becoming nervous

Cc
=
$
j

Proverbs
te Arig De igh ae Teas a LS Sig oc Ee
Don't count your chickens before
they hatch.

Don't judge a book by its cover

‘Meanines OY ee
don't expect a positive result before you
actually see it

don't judge someone or something by
appearance alone

everything ends; good times don't last forever
Don't put all of your eggs in one | don't put all of your hopes and resources into
basket one goal or dream

Don't put off until tomorrow what you | if you can do something today, do it. Don't
can do today wait until tomorrow; don't procrastinate.
Easy come, easy go when you make money quickly, it's very easy
to lose it quickly as well

Fortune favors the bold people who are brave and who take risks are
more successful than people who are do
things safely all the time

don't just wait for good things to happen to
you. Work hard to make them happen.

Hope for the best, prepare for the | iln any situation, be optimistic about the result,
worst but always be ready for the worst outcome

All good things must come to an end

.

God helps those who help themselves

q

--- PAGE 78 ---
x ling { }
. SL TS TT
Activity

Use the given idioms and proverbs in your sentences . You can use them in your daily
routine writing or in discussion as well.

b) Prepositional Phrase: A prepositional phrase is a group of words consisting of a
preposition, its object, and any words that modify the object. Most of the time, a
prepositional phrase modifies a verb or a noun. These two kinds of prepositional
phrases are called adverbial phrases and adjectival phrases, respectively.

a) Adjective Phrase: An adjective phrase is a phrase that contains an adjective,
but there's more to it than that—as a whole, an adjective phrase is a phrase that
acts as an adjective by describing a noun. For example:

Y We experienced the decade's most destructive storm.

Y They saw only the brightest stars through their telescope.

b) Adverbial phrase: An adverbial phrase (or adverb phrase) is a group of words
that acts as an adverb to modify the main clause of a sentence. Adverbial phrases
can be made up of two adverbs. These are typically formed by adding a qualifier or
intensifier (e.g., “incredibly,” “rather,” “very,” “somewhat”) before another
adverb. .

Activity
Read the following sentences and identify whether the underlined phrases are
adjectival, prepositional, or adverbial.

1.The cat with the fluffy tail is my neighbor's pet.

Type of Phrase:

2. She walked along the sandy beach at sunset.
Type of Phrase:

3. The book on the top shelf is my favorite.
Type of Phrase:

4. The car drove quickly through the narrow tunnel.
Type of Phrase:

78 ER

--- PAGE 79 ---
F unite | The Darkling Thrush (Poem)

5. The students in the front row listened attentively.
Type of Phrase:
6. The concert ended with a spectacular fireworks display.
Type of Phrase: =>
7. She answered the questions with confidence.
Type of Phrase:
8. The children played happily in the park all day.
Type of Phrase: =
9. The house with the red door is for sale.
Type of Phrase:

c) Use the following phrasal verbs in sentences.

end up

fall apart

fall down
fall out

figure out
fill in

Points to understand a poem.
These key points can help in the understanding and appreciation of poetry.
a) Theme: What issues and ideas does a poem deal with?

b) Persons: Who is telling the story of the poem? Through whose eyes do we see the
characters and the events of the story?

c) Mood: What is the governing mood or emotion of the poem?

--- PAGE 80 ---
d) Language: What effects do the metaphors, similes; symbols of the poem have on
the reader?

e) Rhythm: Is the rhythm (movement of the poem) slow, steady, and fast?

Activity:

« Keeping in.mind above mentioned points and discuss the theme and mood of the
poem.

- Use paraphrasing skills to paraphrase the first and third stanza of the poem.

+ Summarize the poem “The Darkling Thrush”.

Teacher's Point
* Encourage students to demonstrate attentive listening’ skills while working in groups and taking turns
to speak with standard pronunciation.
* Ask them to comprehend and use contemporary Idioms and proverbs in the different texts and in their
speech.
* Help them to identify and use adjectival, prepositional and adverbial phrases in reading and writing
tasks.

* Ask them to use paraphrasing skills to paraphrase a poem.
+ Motivate them to use summary skills to write an objective summary of the given text and poems.

80 ORES eae ee

--- PAGE 81 ---
ee eee ee TERS Tegra — —
. oi ers.
my saam i = 1 i Dope Ay 3¥>-

ae oe see ance ie te a a 8 i a et some ae ee

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

* read with accurate pronunciation, appropriate pitch and voice variation suitable for fictional and
nonfictional texts

* use pre-reading and while-reading strategies to analyse and explore different layers of meaning
within texts including biases and opinions.

* askand answer higher-order questions to guide/assess reading

* apply skimming and scanning strategies for relevant information.and main points in texts to
identify the writer's purpose, and intended audience. Infer the theme/main idea of the text,
distinguishing between fact and opinion where necessary

* give an informed personal and analytical response to a text and provide some supporting textual
reference

* cite strong and thorough textual evidence to support analysis of what the text says explicitly as
well as inferences drawn from the text.

* demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech (Pronouns) in oral and written
communication in varying degrees of complexity.

* produce legible work that shows the correct spelling of the conventions of punctuation and
capitalization.

* comprehend and use contemporary Idioms and proverbs in the different texts and in their speech.

* write informative/explanatory texts to examine and convey complex ideas, concepts, and
information clearly and accurately through the effective selection, organization, and analysis of
content.

--- PAGE 82 ---
F unit? : _ __ World Heritage Sites in Pakistan

Pre-Reading

* Have you ever visited or heard about any famous historical or cultural sites in
Pakistan?

* Why do you think some sites are designated as World Heritage Sites by UNESCO?
* What do you already know about Pakistan's World Heritage Sites?

World Heritage Sites in Pakistan

It is said that the world has become a global village and we, as the global citizens, need to protect
our common cultural and natural heritage irrespective of where these are. The United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) World Heritage Sites are places of
outstanding cultural or natural importance to all humanity. UNESCO has designated six sites in
Pakistan as World Heritage Sites and twenty-six sites are on the tentative list. They are:
Archaeological Ruins of Moenjodaro, Ancient Monuments at Makli, Thatta , Taxila, Buddhist Ruins
of Takht-i-Bahi and Remains at Sahr-i-Bahlol, Lahore Fort & Shalamar Gardens in Lahore, and the
Rohtas Fort. Let's see what made these sites so important.

The Ruins of Mohenjo-Daro

The ancient civilization of Mohenjo-Daro dates back to 26BC..:In
fact, it is believed to be the oldest physical evidence of urban
planning. From well-planned streets to baked brick structures
and a sophisticated drainage system, the layout of this historic #
settlement proves the occupants of Indus Valley were not only ™
expert planners but were also well-versed in complex civil §
engineering.

After being abandoned some 3,000 years ago, MohenjoDaro remained buried under layers of dust
and sand for several centuries. Archaeologists re-discovered it in 1920 in what is now the modern-
day district of Larkana in Sindh. The opulence of the lost city became quite apparent after
historians found valuable gold, ivory and lapis lazuli artefacts among other precious metals and
stones. This historical site was added to the list of UNESCO World
Heritage Sites in 1980.

How to get there: If you are staying at Sukkur, you can make a day trip
to Mohenjo-Daro. It will take you about two hours to reach your
destination

Makli Necropolis

Makli Hill is one of the largest communal burial sites in the world
dating back to the 14th century. UNESCO declared it a World
Heritage Site in 1981. The massive funerary site is home to the
tombs and mausoleums of several emperors, queens, governors,
saints, philosophers, scholars and other significant people from
different eras. In fact, historians believe around 5 hundred

How do you think the city of
Mohenjo-Daro was destroyed?

]English-11 Federal ISB Sia6 SideB Process BlankM@a/mnianranra ns 2-22

--- PAGE 83 ---
f unit7 | World Heritage Sites in Pakistan

thousand to 1 million people were buried on the hill between the 14th and 18th century. The
intricate stone carvings on the gravesites in the ‘City of Dead’ display Hindu, Islamic, Persian,
Mughal, Gujarati and Middle Eastern-style artwork. It indicates the necropolis was used by more
than one religion or civilization. The sprawling necropolis covers an area of 10 kilometres.

HOW TO GET THERE: If you're staying at Karachi, you can make a day trip to Makli and Thatta. It'll
take you about two hours to reach your destination

The Archaeological Complex of Taxila

Taxila includes a Mesolithic cave and the archaeological
remains of four early settlement sites, Buddhist monasteries,
and a Muslim.mosque and madrassa. Situated near the Silk
Road that linked China to the West, Taxila reached its zenith
between the 1stand 5th centuries. It is now one of the most
important archaeological sites in Asia. One of the sites, the
Bihr mound, is associated with the historic event of the
triumphant entry of Alexander the Great into Taxila. The
archaeological sites of Saraikala, Bhir, Sirkap, and Sirsukh are
collectively of unique importance in illustrating the
evolution of urban settlement on the Indian subcontinent.
The Taxila serial site also includes Khanpur cave from where
microlithic tools of the Mesolithic period were found.
Buddhist monuments erected throughout the Taxila valley
transformed it into a famous religious destination for pilgrims from Central Asia and China. This
historical site was added to the list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites in 1980.

HOW TO GET THERE: If you are staying at Islamabad/ Rawalpindi, you can make a day trip to
Taxila. It will take you about one hour to reach your destination.

Buddhist Ruins of Takht-i-Bahi and Sahr-i-Bahlol

Dating back to 1 AD, Takht-i-Bahi monastery is one of —&
the most well-preserved Buddhist complexes from
that time period. Due to its location in the
mountainous range of what is now the modern-day
city of Mardan in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, this stone 4
monastery remained largely unaffected from the
invaders and aggressors. Archaeologists believe the
inscriptions found in Takht-iBahi, which literally
means ‘throne of spring,’ refer to Gondophares |, the &
founder of the ancient Indo-Parthian Kingdom. After
being abandoned in 7 AD, the sites sustained some damage. However, it was re-discovered in the
early 1900s. The excavations began in 1907, leading archaeologists to unearth the large complex
along with other important artefacts and statues. Both Takht-i-Bahi and Sahr-i-Bahlol were listed
as UNESCO World Heritage Sites in1980.

--- PAGE 84 ---
eunie7. 2) World Heritage Sites in Pakistan

HOW TO GET THERE: If you are staying at Islamabad, you can make a
day trip to Takht e Bahi. It will take you about one and half hours to
reach your destination. From Peshawar it takes around one and half
hour.

Lahore Fort and Shalamar Gardens

These are two masterpieces from the time of the brilliant Mughal dynasty, which reached its
height during the reign of the Emperor Shah Jahan. The fort contains marble palaces and mosques
decorated with mosaics and gilt. The area includes two ;
distinct royal complexes, the Lahore Fort and the Shalimar
Gardens, both located in the City of Lahore, at a distance of 7
km. from each other. Both sites are outstanding examples of
Mughal artistic expression at it is height, as it evolved during
the16th ‘and 17th centuries. There are 21 monuments
preserved within the boundaries of Lahore Fort from the reign
of Akbar (1542-1605) through the reign of Shah Jahan (1627-
58). Equally the Shalimar Gardens, laid out by Shah Jahan in
1641-2 embodies Mughal garden design. Both complexes comathes may be understood to
constitute a masterpiece of human creative genius. These two historical sites were added to the
list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites in.1981.

HOW TO GET THERE: Both of these sites are located with the territory of Lahore City. It will take
you about half an hour to one hour to reach your destinations depending on the location of your
place of stay.

Rohtas Fort

Pashtun King Sher Shah Suri, the founder of short-lived Suri
dynasty, built the Rohtas Fort in the 16th century. It is located
near the city of Jhelum. UNESCO described it as an
‘exceptional example of the Muslim military architecture of
Central and South Asia.’ The remarkably intact Rohtas Fort
was added to the list of UNESCO World Heritage Site in
Pakistan in 1997. This incredible fortress was built in 7 years.
The rationale behind it is construction was to stop the forces of Mughal Emperor Humayun from
invading the region following his defeat in the Battle of Chausa. The Rohtas Fort sits on an
elevated hill on the Pothohar Plateau. The sprawling fortress is surrounded by four kilometers of
fortified walls reinforced with 68 bastion towers and twelve gates. This historical site in Pakistan
used to hold a force of up to 30,000 personnel. That makes it an incredibly difficult military
stronghold to attack.

HOW TO GET THERE: If you are staying at Islamabad, you can make a day trip to Rohtas Fort. It
will take you about two hours to reach your destination. From Lahore it takes around three and
half hours.

(The above text has been taken from a travel brochure of Pakistan Tourism Develoment
corporation's website. https://tourism.gov.pk/ptdc.html) ,

What does the word
“inscription” mean?

* Name the Heritage site you like the best?

Enatish-11 Federal ISB Sia6 SideA Process Bianle O4/20/2024022 05:22:22

--- PAGE 85 ---
r Unit 7) World Heritage Sites in Pakistan

©

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give
synonyms of each in the given column, The first one is done for you.

— Sn en ene mee

irrespective without regard to something specific regardless
communal F
funerary
carvings
necropolis a large cemetery of an ancient city
zenith the highest point or peak S
mesolithic relating to the middle part of the Stone jee,
— by the use of microliths (small stone
bastion a projecting part « of wallls built at an angle
rationale a set of reasons or a logical basis

a. Read the unit carefully and answer the following questions.

1.
2.
3.

Which site is described as “the oldest physical evidence of urban planning"?
What is the significance of the Makli Necropolis?

What does the inclusion of multiple styles of artwork in Makli)Necropolis
suggest about it is history and usage?

. What historical events and figures are associated with the Taxila archaeological

complex, and why is it significant?

. In what ways do these heritage sites reflect the rich and diverse history of

Pakistan?

. Do you think it's important for the government to invest in the preservation and

maintenance of such heritage sites? Why or why not?

. Imagine you had the opportunity to visit one of these sites. Which one would

you choose, and what aspects of its history and culture would you be most
interested in exploring?

- Do you believe that it's the responsibility of all global citizens to protect and preserve

cultural and natural heritage? Why or why not?

--- PAGE 86 ---
b. Answer the given short questions by choosing the correct answer:.

i. | Why was Makli Necropolis declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO?
a) It is a famous religious destination for pilgrims.
b) It is the oldest physical evidence of urban planning.
c) It is a massive funerary site with tombs from different civilizations.
d) It is associated with the triumphant entry of Alexander the Great.
ii. Which historical event is associated with the Bihr mound in Taxila?
a) The Battle of Chausa
b) The founding of the Indo-Parthian Kingdom
c) The triumphant entry of Alexander the Great
d) The evolution of urban settlement on the Indian subcontinent
iii. What was the primary purpose behind the construction of Rohtas Fort?
a) To showcase Mughal artistic expression
b) To serve as a Buddhist pilgrimage site
c). To stop the forces of Mughal Emperor Humayun from invading the region
D. To act as a communal burial site for various civilizations.

Oral Communication

Geographical Information System and Tourism

Geographic information systems (GIS) are |=
essential for developing the tourism sector. It }-
makes it possible to create applications and
interactive maps that provide visitors latest
details about places to go, attractions to see,
and services available in those areas. GIS aids
travellers in route planning, hotel choices, and
locating sites. By examining tourist information,
traffic patterns, and weather updates, it also |v
helps with sustainable tourism management. |
Additionally, GIS supports risk assessment and
catastrophe management for safer travel
including landslide and flashflood warnings.
Globally, GIS enables the tourism industry to provide more customised, effective, and
responsible services, improving the travel experience for visitors.

The teacher will assign each student group a tourist site in Pakistan and provide them with a map.
Students will mark their assigned site on the map and use GIS tools to calculate distances, locate
airports, train stations, bus terminals, hotels, and resorts. Each group will then present their virtual tour
itinerary to the class, covering site details, travel routes, transportation options, and accommodations.
The class will engage in discussions, questions, and comparisons of different sites, exploring the
advantages and challenges of visiting each location.

--- PAGE 87 ---
F unit 7 | ; World Heritage Sites in Pakistan

Vocabulary and Grammar

Idioms and Proverbs:

Idioms and proverbs enrich language by providing colorful expressions, conveying cultural
values, assisting efficient communication, and adding depth and variety to conversation.
They are an integral part of language and culture worldwide. Some proverbs and idioms
related to travelling are shared below with meanings:

Idioms:

Hit the road: To begina journey or start traveling.

We should hit the road. early tomorrow to avoid traffic.

Travel light: To pack only the essentials and not carry
too much luggage.

When backpacking, it's best to travel light for
convenience.

Catch a red-eye flight: To take an overnight flight. a
lll catch a red-eye flight so | can arrive in the LETS GO TE AVEL
morning. MGS A

Proverbs:

Home is where the heart is: No matter how far you travel, your true home is where you feel
the most comfortable and loved.

The journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step: To achieve a significant goal, you
must start with a small, manageable action.

Travel broadens the mind: Traveling and experiencing different cultures can expand your
perspective and knowledge.

When in Rome, do as the Romans do: Adapt to the customs and behaviors of the place
you are visiting.

Use the above mentioned proverbs and idioms in your own senetnces.

* has

87 Sate ae ee 5 |

--- PAGE 88 ---
unit 7°) World Heritage Sites in Pakistan

Pronoun:-
‘As studied in earlier grades, a pronoun is a word that is used instead of a noun or noun

phrase. Pronouns refer to either a noun that has already been mentioned or to a noun that
does not need to be named specifically.

Types of Pronouns.

Use in a Sentence
He is a lucky man
We are heading towards the
hills.
Mine, yours, his, | This bag is mine.
hers, theirs, ours Yours is on that table.

Definition
Replaces specific
people or things

Pronoun Type Examples
1, you, he, she,

it, we they

Possessive - Demonstrates
Pronoun ownership or
Possession
Reflects the subject | Myself, yourself, | |She has baked the cake

and object being himself, herself, | herself.
the same person of | itself, ourselves | He manages to do his work
thing himself.

Points to specific This, that, | don't like these. Can | take
people or things these, those those?

Reflexive Pronoun

Demonstrative
Pronoun

interrogative | |Usedtoask ‘Who, whom, | Who is responsible for this? _
Pronoun questions ‘whose, which, Which one do you like the
most?
indefinite Pronoun | Doesn't specify who Som Somebody, Everyone thought that
or what is referred | someone, / someone will do it and at the
to ‘no nobody, no one, end no one did it.
everybody

| Relative Pronoun’

Introducesa_~—«*(| Who, whom, _| The cyclist who won the race ~
dependent clause | whose, which, | trained/hard.

that Where did you buy the dress
| that you wore last week
Reciprocal Indicates a mutual Eachother, one We all must respect one |
Pronoun action or another another.

relationship
Emphatic Pronoun | Emphasizes a noun | Myself, yourself, | Aline, herself is responsible

or a pronoun himself, herself, | for her failure.
itself, ourselves | Ali, himself asked for a raise.
Distributive _—| Refers tomembers Each, either, Each year thousands of people
Pronouns of a group | neither, none, go for Hajj.

individually | any Neither of them goes tothe |

--- PAGE 89 ---
World Sites in Pakistan

a) Encircle the demonstrative pronoun in each sentence given below.
* This is my favorite teddy bear.
« Would you like some of these?
* Those years at the lake were the best times of my life.

b) Add an interrogative pronoun in the following sentences.
+ _____one of the books is your favorite?
* _ is the title of the poem that you liked?
* ______ should | address the letter?
° was the package sent?

c) Fill in the blanks with appropriate types of pronouns
Yesterday, ___went to the park and met up with some friends.
their adorable dog with and was a bundle of energy. played
fetch for a while, and then | decided to take a walk by to enjoy the peaceful
surroundings. As | strolled, beautiful flowers caught my eye, and | couldn't resist

asked me about the flowers, and | happily shared the story

had brought

picking a few. Later,
of my solo adventure.

d) Punctuate the given lines.
encouraging travel also boosts consumer and business confidence it supports two way trade
and creates export income for the poor countries with few similar alternatives

“$y

--- PAGE 90 ---
ee Unie zee World Heritage Sites in Pakistan

Ecotourism has gained popularity as a responsible and sustainable way to explore natural
environments while minimizing negative impacts. We all must protect and preserve the areas we
visit during our holidays. The goal of ecotourism may include educating tourists about clean
environment, raising money for environmental preservation, safeguarding the animals and plants
of the area and fostering respect for various cultures.

Keeping the above in mind, write an essay on “How can we become responsible Tourists?”

¢ Pa
Sustainable tourism
Responsible travel Local culture

Memorable experience Climate

, ‘ hange
; Environmental protection omangye
‘

Economic benefits
a ECO-tourism

.
Social development —

Responsible .

Economy

Traditions

Ecofriendly we

Teacher's Point
Encourage the students to engage in extended discussions and critique taking into account other speakers
viewpoints and presenting one’s own with clarity.

+ Inwriting, help the students by Introducing a topic; organizing complex ideas, concepts, and information so that
each new element builds on that which precedes it to create a unified whole; include formatting (e.g., headings),
graphics (e.g., figures, tables), and multimedia when useful to aiding comprehension.

+ Inclassroom discussions, a variety of linguistic exponents may be used, such as inquires, persuasion, arguments,
comparisons, evaluations in a wide range of context throughout the oral communication skills practice session.

--- PAGE 91 ---
Social Media:

A

Blessing or a Curse?

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

read with accurate pronunciation, appropriate pitch and voice variation suitable for fictional
and nonfictional texts

use pre-reading and while-reading strategies to analyse and explore different layers of meaning
within texts including biases and opinions

ask and answer higher-order questions to guide/assess reading

apply skimming and scanning strategies for relevant information and main points in texts to
identify the writer's purpose, and intended audience. Infer the theme/main idea of the text,
distinguishing between fact and opinion where necessary

apply knowledge of parts of speech, tenses, sentence structure and other features of grammar
afid vocabulary to understand how language functions in difterent contexts, make effective
choices for meaning or style while reading, listening and writing

speak confidently and fluently in a wide range of contexts, For example, (conflict resolution,
panel discussion, role-play, dialogue, etc.) to fulfil different purposes (exposition,
argumentation etc.)

evaluate the particular elements of a story or drama (e.g., how the setting shapes the
characters or plot)

write and critique (self/peer checking) the final draft after complete editing and proofreading
ensure each paragraph develops the main idea of the essay/piece of writing and the topic
sentence of each paragraph

--- PAGE 92 ---
Social Media: A Blessing or a Curse?

Pre-Reading
- Can you tell different ways of getting the latest information ?
+ Which social media platform do you like the most and why? | ~

You are not Alone!

Adeel entered the home and rushed to his room. Mrs. Imran got a little worried as
he hadn't spoken more than few words on their drive back from school. He was usually full
of stories and tidbits about what happened in the class and the little mischiefs that his
friends were involved in. He was a bright and cheerful boy, always enthusiastic about
school, friends, and life in general. What could be the cause? She thought worriedly.

It all started innocently enough when Adeel's class fellows accidently got their
hands on some embarrassing photos of him from a school farewell party. He was just being
a young man having fun. Instead of keeping those to themselves, they decided to share
them without his consent. Someone hacked his profile and uploaded the photos. Those
images spread like wildfire across social media, followed by cruel and hurtful comments.

Adeel was devastated. The once-vibrant boy
now felt like a shadow of his former self. He stopped
enjoying school, lost interest in football, and
withdrew from his friends. Every day was a struggle,
as he faced not only the online harassment but also
the ridicule and jeering of his classmates in person. Going to school become the most
difficult thing for him to do.

Things took a darker turn when an elder group of boys at school began to blackmail
Adeel, threatening to share even more embarrassing content if he did not comply with
their demands. They were asking his lunch, his watch and then money. The weight of it all
was crushing, and Adeel sank into a deep depression, feeling utterly helpless.

While-reading

How did Adeel's silence about his
suffering affect the situation?

Mrs. Imran kept asking him the reason for this change but Adeel always told her
that everything was fine. Mrs. Imran decided to take help from her brother, Muzammil, a
wise and caring man. Muzammil took Adeel out for a walk to the nearby park and told him
that he got their unwavering support, no matter what the problem was. He assured Adeel
that he had the support of the whole family with him. At last, Adeel shared his
heartbreaking story, and his uncle listened attentively. After a moment of thought, his

uncle offered some guidance.

(Sane Sse mh rN ES ERS

--- PAGE 93 ---
P: “-unit 8] Social Media: A Blessing or a Curse?

“Adeel,” he said, “I understand that this is a difficult time for you, but you must not
suffer in silence. We have official authorities that can help you deal with online bullying
and harassment.”

Muzammil explained that the Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) in Pakistan had a
dedicated cybercrime division. They were responsible for investigating cases related to
online harassment, identity theft, fraud and more. Adeel's eyes widened with hope as he
listened to his uncle's advice. |

"First, we need to document everything,” his uncle continued. "Take screenshots of
the harassing messages, comments, and any proof related to the identity theft. Keep
records of dates and times as well. This will be vital when we report the incident to the
FIA.”

Adeel nodded, finally feeling like he had a plan. His uncle also talked to his parents
and the school administration about the situation. It was essential to involve them in
resolving the issue. They took steps to ensure Adeel's
safety and well-being.

With Muzammil's guidance and support, Adeel
took the necessary steps. They reported the | what do you think would have
cyberbullying to the FIA, providing all the evidence | happened if Uncle Muzammil had
Adeel had collected. The authorities took the matter | not supported Adeel?
seriously, and investigations began immediately.

Over time, as the investigations unfolded, those responsible for the cyberbullying
faced the consequences of their actions. Adeel's courage in standing up against his bullies
‘not only helped him regain his self-esteem but also sent a powerful message about the
consequences of cyberbullying.

Adeel came to see the importance of getting help while dealing with online
harassment as his life gradually returned to normal. During those difficult times, his
uncle's wisdom and guidance had been his lifeline. He also came out of the ordeal
stronger and more resilient than ever before, all because to the support of his family,
friends, and the FIA. He is now committed to spread awareness about the perils of
cyberbullying and help those who are struggling with similar issues. ~

(Written by: Sadia Malik)

* Why is it important to share your problems with your family?

PUNE TE 92

--- PAGE 94 ---
f units | Social Media: A Blessing or a Curse?

hi)

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give
synonyms of each in the given column. The first one is done for you. Also use these words
in your own sentences.

making fun of or mocking someone

‘taunting
eee |
situations

FOSERS SV CONES. REN) Got feelin Henan

funfolded _—Jopenedvexplained |

puetine =— eee

baa =
online platforms

pamveeteted | CO OS, eran [ee ee |

| ald l= ell

a. Read the unit carefully and answer the following questions.

What happened to Adeel?

‘What impression do you get of him after reading the story?

Why did his mother feel that there was something bothering Adeel?

What was Adeel's initial response to the cyberbullying he experienced, and how
did it affect his daily life?

5. What were the demands made by the elder group of boys who were blackmailing
Adeel, and how did he feel as a result of this?

6. How did Muzammil advise Adeel to deal with the cyberbullying, and why were
these steps important?

7. In your opinion, why is it crucial to involve official authorities like the Federal
Investigation Agency (FIA) in cases of cyberbullying and harassment? What impact
do you think this had on Adeel's situation?

8. Read some online journals/blogs/articles to find out what other problems are

faced by users of social media.

lk tk ek te

--- PAGE 95 ---
. Social Media: A Blessi g or a Curse?

b. Answer the given short questions by choosing the correct answer:
i. Adeel's class fellows got their hands on embarrassing photos from a school *
farewell party, leadingto___-———_ spread across social media.
a) uplifting comments b) encouraging messages
c) cruel and hurtful comments d) supportive remarks
ii. Adeel's withdrawal from school and loss of interest in football were direct

consequences of both online harassment and

classmates.
a) encouragement b) support
c) _ ridicule d) empathy

from his

fii. Adeel took the necessary steps by reporting the cyberbullying to the FIA and
providing , leading to investigations and consequences for the

perpetrators.

a) irrelevant information b) fabricated evidence
c) all the evidence he had collected  d) unspecific details

Oral-‘Communication

/ owe

Accepting)! retiable?

Files
emails,
jes, pictures of

informations Tell an adult if

Pines < person
jo Sener of uncomfortable.

The internet is both a blessing and a curse. Teenagers are growing up with smart phones in
their hands, tablets, and laptops in their homes. They use digital technologies for everyday
activities like keeping in touch with friends on social media, relaxing and doing school work.
Teenagers need to know how to behave respectfully online and how to avoid online risks.

Activity

* Divide the above 5 topics in five groups. Read on the given topics
and present it in front of the class in an oral presentation or
making an infographic.

* Share one practical tip or strategy that you believe is crucial for
staying safe while using the internet and social media platforms?
Explain why you think this tip is important and how it can help
protect your online security and privacy.

How To Contact FIA?

Call helpline: 1991
Email:helpdesk@nr3c.gov.pk
contact: 051-9106384

051-9106690
051-9106691

--- PAGE 96 ---
P. -unit 8] Social Media: A Blessing or a Curse?

Vocabulary and Grammar

1. Clauses:
A clause is “a group of words containing a subject and predicate and functioning as
a member of a complex or compound sentence.

” - Merriam-Webster

Example:

| went to Lahore last year. (One clause sentence/ simple sentence)

| came here and| saw my friend. (Two clause sentence/compound sentence)

When | came here, | saw my friend, and he greeted me. (Three clause
sentence/compound-complex sentence)

There are two main types of clauses:
* Independent Clause
* Dependent Clause

Independent Clause

It functions on its own to make a meaningful sentence and looks much like a regular
sentence with a subject+verb+object (SVO) structure.

In a sentence two independent clauses can be connected by the coordinators: and,
but, so, or, nor, for, yet.

Examples:
* He is a wise man.
* | like him.
* Can you do it?
+ Do it please. (Subject you is hidden)
* | read the whole novel.

+ [want to buy a new dress, but | don’t have enough money. (Two independent
clauses)

* He went to London and visited the Lords. (Subject of the second clause is ‘he,’
so “he visited the Lords” is an independent clause. )

Alina smiles whenever she sees her son. (One independent clause)

--- PAGE 97 ---
fF units | Social Media: A Blessing or a Curse?

Dependent Clause
It cannot function on its own because it leaves an idea or thought unfinished. It is
also called a subordinate clause. These help the independent clauses complete the
sentence. Alone, it cannot form a complete sentence.
Example:

When | was returning home, | had an accident.

| know the man who stole the watch.

He bought a car which was too expensive.

| know that he cannot do it.

He does not know where he was born.

* If you don't eat, | won't go.

The subordinators do the work of connecting the dependent clause to another
clause to complete the sentence. In each of the dependent clauses, the first word is
a subordinator. Subordinators include relative pronouns, subordinating conjunctions,
and noun clause markers.
Dependent clauses come in three types:
noun clauses, relative clauses, and adverb clauses.
(Noun clauses replace other nouns in a sentence, but relative and adverb clauses
modify words already in the sentence rather than removing and replacing them.)
Let's look at relative Clauses in detail.
Relative Clauses
As can be seen from the examples of dependent clauses above, complex sentences
or sentences with one or more dependent clauses are formed principally by means
of relative pronouns. Relative clauses give us information.about the person or thing
mentioned. The basic relative pronouns are who, which, and that (who also has the
derived forms whom and whose).

a) Underline the relative clause in each sentence. Encircle the relative pronoun
that introduces the clause.

i. The book that | got from the library is due tomorrow.

ii. My father, whom | respect, congratulated me on a job well done.
iii. | Thestoreno longer sold the computer that | wanted.

iv. The child to whom you have spoken is my sister.

v. The tallest man who came to the show is my Uncle Abid.

vi. My first novel, which was published last year, was about my family.

--- PAGE 98 ---
F unit 8 ar Social Media: A Blessing or a Curse?

b) Fill in the blanks with appropriate Relative pronouns to make Relative clauses.

i. Thisisthetown___I spent my childhood.
ii. Thisisthehouse___————s | was bornin..
iii. Irsa gave her a pencil she put in her bag at once.

iv. This is Ali you met last year.
v. The people live next door are not very friendly.
vi. The only thing matters is to find our way home.

vii. She was respected by the people with__ she worked.

2. Adjective:
An adjective describes or modifies noun/s and pronoun/s in a sentence. It normally
indicates quality, size, shape, duration, feelings, contents, and more about a noun or
pronoun. Adjectives usually provide relevant information about the nouns/pronouns
they modify/describe.
Example:

* The Pakistani cricket team has fast bowlers. (What kind?)

« Hehave ten candies in his pocket. (How many?)

* |loved that red car. (Which one?)

* learn more money than he does. (How much?)

Types of adjectives
| Type of adjectives | Definition | examples | Used in a sentence
_ Descriptive describes nouns and Fast/slow,  \-have a fast car.
_ Adjectives/ pronouns _ easy/tough, | The hungry cats are
Qualitative : Long/short | crying:
Adjectives |
Quantitative refers to the Numbers | have 20 rupees in my
Adjectives quantity of the showing wallet. (How much)
nouns/ pronoun quantity _ They have three
_ children. (How many)
Proper Adjectives the adjective form | England, | The English language
of proper nouns Karachi, China, | The Chinese Cuisine
| Chiniot | The Chinioti Furniture

:nalish-11 Federal ISB Sia7 SideB Process Blank MA/narnnn2n?s-05-78:29

--- PAGE 99 ---
Compound
Adjectives

| Demonstrative
| Adjective

_ compound
nouns/combined
words modify other

| nouns

refers to something
or someone

| Possessive Adjectives | indicates possession
i

=

_ Interrogative
Adjectives

or ownership

| asks a question.
- Must be followed by
a noun or a pronoun

Indefinite Adjectives describes or

modifies a noun
unspecifically

Social Media: A Blessing or a Curse?

Once-lively You have a broken-
broken-down down sofa.

two-week He saw a six-foot-long
often separated | snake.

by a hyphen

this, that, This car is mine.
these, those.

my, his, her, My car is parked

our, their, your. outside.
His cat is very cute.

which, what, Which phone do you

whose ; use?
Whose car is this?

few, many, Sana gave some candy
much, most, to her.
all, any, each, = Noor wants a few
every, either, moments alone.
nobody,

several, some,
etc.

a) identify different types of adjectives from the given sentences.
i. The coffee was made from fresh, ground Colombian coffee beans.
ii. Whose child is this?
iii. The fourth boy became first in the final exam.
iv. There is enough juice for my breakfast.
v. lamreading a collection of Greek myths.
vi. This boy is painting a great picture.
vii. Most people are poor in this world.
viii. My father was a university professor.
ix. The record-breaking snow storm has finally passed.
x. Many scholars are attending the research conference.

99

--- PAGE 100 ---
rout _ nasa Social Media: A Blessing or a Curse?
b) Write a short descriptive paragraph describing an object/place or person using
different types of adjectives given above.

c) Punctuate the given lines.
news broadcast through different media helps us know about the day to day events in
the world news tele films and documentaries revolving around social issues increase
social awareness in children and develop their concern towards society and
strengthen the relationship between the media and common man

3. Use the given phrasal verbs in sentences.
i. give in
ii. give out
iii. give up
iv. go after

v. go agains
vi. go ahead

Internet is a double edged sword. It has its pros and
cons. Pros of the internet include access to vast
information, online courses (MOOCs) for education,
effective digital marketing for small businesses, and a
plethora of entertainment options. However, it has cons

like privacy concerns, misinformation, addiction to
entertainment, and potential online fraud. Balancing its
benefits and drawbacks is crucial.

List the pros and cons of Internet in the table below.

DM at rt) Une 100 bein

Se NEES at Rt Se

MOOC stands for Massive Open
Online Courses that you can
register yourself into and get
self-paced, free instruction to
improve your skills.

--- PAGE 101 ---
__ Social Media: A Blessing or a Curse?

MeL. LS

Now write an argumentative essay.of 250-350 words about “Positive and Negative
Effects of Internet”. Don't forget to use transitional devices of comparison like “but,
even so, conversely, differently, however, in contrast, in spite of, in the same way,
nevertheless, on the contrary, on the other hand”

Teacher's Point
* Encourage the students to engage in extended discussions and critique taking into account other
i= speakers’ viewpoints and presenting one’s own with clarity.
+ Explain grammatical concepts in context and help students use these concepts in different writing
tasks.
* In argumentative writing, help the students by Introducing a topic; organizing complex ideas,
concepts, and information so that each new element builds on that which precedes it to create a

unified whole; include formatting (e.g., headings), graphics (e.g., figures, tables), and multimedia
when useful to aiding comprehension.

te, ‘
ee
%.

~

--- PAGE 102 ---
mm
Sunshine After Rain
(Brenda Winders)

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

read with accurate pronunciation, appropriate pitch and voice variation suitable for fictional
and nonfictional texts

ask and answer higher-order questions to guide/assess reading

evaluate how authors use language, including figurative language, considering the impact on the
reader

provide ah objective summary of a range of texts including fiction, non-fiction and other types
of text

evaluate two or more central ideas of a text and analyze their development over the course of
the text

analyze multiple interpretations of a story, drama, or poem

identify rhyme schemes and figurative language in poems read, view and analyse a variety of
reading grade-appropriate and high-interest books and texts from print and non-print sources:
a. Poetry (free verse, narrative and rhythmic poems)

write informative/explanatory texts to examine and convey complex ideas, concepts, and
information clearly and accurately through the effective selection, organization, and analysis of
content

use summary skills to write an objective summary of the given text and poems

demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written communication in
varying degrees of complexity

--- PAGE 103 ---
f unit | Sunshine After Rain

Pre-Reading

* How does life skill education translate into interaction with strangers,
making friends and handling emergency?

* Name some situations in which you should say ‘No’ to your friends or
acquaintances.

Sunshine After Rain

One day when | was young, | heard a knock at my door.
It sounded familiar, like | had heard it before.

| opened the door, and to my surprise,
There stood a young lady with blond hair and brown eyes.

She said, "| have the answers; are you ready to play?”
So | grabbed my money and |. said okay.

There were the answers that | had always sought.
Liquids, pills, and powders, and | bought-and bought.

While-reading

Why did her loved ones “could
only watch and frown”?

She kept whispering something | could only guess. Y,
It sounded like she was repeating, "Yes, Yes, Yes."

| thought of my family, oh what a mess,
But all | heard was screaming, "Yes, Yes, Yes.” oon

Then one day, my friend suddenly changed.
Her face became ugly, calloused, and deranged.

She grabbed my hand and we tore through the town,
My loved ones and friends could only watch and frown.

Acer
learning

| had to find help; | was at my wits end.
| had lost my child, my family, and my friends.

| said, "God are you there? Can you help me, please?"
A sudden peace cam® over me and | fell to my knees.

—
L =
!

--- PAGE 104 ---
; - Sunshine After Rain

| said, "God, I'm not worth it; | feel like a jerk.”
He said, “Suit up and show up; it's time to go to work."

So | am here to tell you in this little rhyme.
Life keeps getting better one day at a time.

So when you think you are going insane.
There's always sunshine after the rain

Citation:
one Winders. “Sunshine After Rain.” ee Friend coon — 7, 2011.

Inspirational Poem About Addiction

From the poet: “This poem was written when | went to treatment in 2002. | loved
drugs and being high. | was a good person doing bad things. | lost my family, and my
heart breaks every day. But | pray that I will continue to find that sunshine. | finally
learned the difference between needing recovery and wanting it.”

Theme of the Poem:

The main theme of the poem is the journey of a person from despair to hope,
emphasizing personal transformation and recovery. It explores the consequences of
drug addiction, making destructive choices, the loss of relationships, and the ultimate
realization of the need for change. The theme highlights the idea that no matter how
terrible the situation may seem, there is always a possibility for recovery and a
brighter future.

Post-reading

* What does the poet mean by "life keeps getting better one day at a time’?

* How does life get better?

--- PAGE 105 ---
F unit 9 - | Sunshine After Rain

C=

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give
synonyms of each in the given column. The first one is done for you. Also use these
words in your own sentences.

Words ——~«[ Meanings ———SSSSS*«dSymonymas

mentally disturbed aa oOo
frown showing disapproval or | we |
displeasure
intelligence
jerk ran obnoxious person
insane [being foolish or irrational [SSS

a. Read the peom carefully and answer the following questions:
1. Consider the poem's title, “Sunshine After the Rain.” How does this title
encapsulate the central message of the poem?
2. Skim the poem and identify the key themes.

3. What do you infer about the narrator's initial response to the young lady who
came to their door?

4, What might the poet be refering to in "liquids, pills, and powders’?

5. What were the consequences of the narrator's choice to take drugs?

6. Explore the significance of the repeated word "Yes" in the poem. What could it
symbolize?

7. Pick out some of the literary devices used in the poem. (Symbol, metaphor,
repetition and alliteration)

8. Do you agree with the idea that “life keeps getting better one day at a time”?
Why or why not?

9. How does the poem address the theme of redemption or second chances? Do
you know someone who turned a new leaf and changed his/her life?

aaa

--- PAGE 106 ---
F unit 9 | Sunshine After Rain

b. Answer the given short questions by choosing the correct answer:
i. In the poem, the speaker initially opens the door because:
a) she recognized the visitor's face. b) she was expecting someone.

c) she heard a familiar knock. d) she wanted to play a game.
ii. The young lady in the poem offers the speaker:

a) friendship and companionship. b) answers and a chance to play.

c) money and possessions. d) liquids, pills, and powders.

iii. The turning point in the poem occurs when:
a) the speaker's family becomes deranged.
b) the young lady's appearance changes.
c) the speaker loses all her possessions.
d) the speaker reaches out to God for help.

Oral Communication

Do you Know?

In Pakistan, the total number of drug addicts as per a UN report is
7.6 million (76 lakh), 78% of whom are male, while the remaining
22% are female. The number of these addicts is increasing at the
rate of 40,000 per year, making Pakistan°one of the most drug
affected countries in the world. Drug education is of vital
importance in Pakistan, addressing a critical need to raise :.
awareness about the physical, psychological, and social risks * 2.
associated with drug use. Physically, drugs can wreak havoc on an
individual's health, leading to addiction, overdose,.and
debilitating diseases, even death. Psychologically, they can alter brain chemistry, impair
judgment, and induce mental health disorders. Socially, drug abuse breaks relationships,
disrupts communities, and lead to criminal activities. It's essential to emphasize that
while drugs can have legitimate medicinal uses, they can also be a source of recreation.
This dual nature highlights the importance of educating individuals especially young
people on making informed choices. The causes included inability to say No to friends,
peer pressure, stress and anxiety and loneliness. Equipping our youth with strategies to
resist peer pressure and develop refusal skills is crucial. Drug education serves as a
protective shield against the harmful impact of substance abuse. It enables individuals to
make responsible decisions for their well-being and the betterment of society.

Divide the class in groups. Give each group a different topic from the above passage.

Number of drug addicts,
Reasons for drug addiction

RTE eae ts SE 106

i

oo
|

--- PAGE 107 ---
Problems caused by Drug addiction

Refusal skills (Saying No)

Ways to get help.

Ask them to look up more information on the given topics and then present it to the
class. They may make a small poster/ infographic and explain it to their class fellows.

Vocabulary and Grammar

1. a. Adverb:-
As we have studied in earlier grades, an adverb is a word or an expression that modifies
a verb, adjective, another adverb, determiner, clause, preposition, or sentence.

Example:
* The bird sang melodiously. (How?)
* He is very careless. (How much?)
* They are still playing outside. (Where?)
* We are friends and we often meet. (How frequently?)
* We need to plant these trees in the morning. (When?)

Adverbs typically express manner, place, time, frequency, degree, level of
certainty, etc., answering questions such as how?, in what way?, when?, where?,
and to what extent?. This is called the adverbial function, and may be performed by
single words (adverbs) or by multi-word adverbial phrases and adverbial clauses.

b. Types of Adverbs:

Sometimes, recently, 1. 1 used to go out for refreshments.
Adverbs during, always, soon, yet, 2: gece purchased a costly Diamond
of Time usually, never, etc. 3. He caught eating his tiffin during the lectures.

Everywhere, into 1.He the river to save a little girl.
Adverbs of nowhere, here, there, 2°An aplane i thyng sore Se Souse ee
Place above, below, inside, etc.| “to. sa

erbs of Dangerously, softly, 1. The barber trimmed his hair and beard
<< - quickly, gently, neatly, | > 5, Tone” ‘Ne Situation so slavaity
anner calm, etc. 3. There is a fragile material, handle it carefully.
Adverbs of | Entirely, slightly, highly, | }:[oes7s climate 's extremely hot.
Degree totally, almost, just, etc. 3. This mquid is hobly inflammable.

Adverbs of | Constantly, always .He likes to do shopping occasionally
F occasionally, regularly 2 She teguladly waters the plants.

Sunshine After Rain

next, now, undoubtedly, | 1. coodbye week.
Conjunctive | rather, additionally,” | 2 ve woud aes poy thn wot

Ea Raa, ule
i. saa ete

oT

--- PAGE 108 ---
Sunshine After Rain

c. Positioning Adverbs:
It is also important to know where these adverbs are to be placed in a sentence as
changing their position might change the meaning.

Example:

(a)They immediately called off the plan to go on a strike.
(b) They called off the plan to immediately go on a strike.

In sentence (a), the plan was to go on strike but something happened and the plan
was immediately called off. (There will be no strike)
In sentence (b),.on the other hand, it means that the plan originally was to go on
strike at once, but something happened and they delayed going to the strike at
once. (They might go later)

manner

Adverb of
place

Adverb of
time

Sadly, well,
carefully, fast,
quickly

Away, here,
there, nowhere,
somewhere

Afterwards, soon,
recently, today,
lately, eventually

Always, never,
rarely,
sometimes,
usually, often,
occasionally,
normally

(sometimes
middle for-ly
adverbs)

After the verb or
the object

Initial or end

Initial or end
(for-ly adverbs)

She sang the song
beautifully.

He politely declined the
offer.

He does not work here.
| knew | have seen him
somewhere.

Recently, | met your
father.

They have moved to
America recently.

He will soon be out of this
firm.

She will mow make the
announcement.

He has never uttered a
rude word

There isn't much crowd at
the stop normally.
Usually, he wakes up very
early.

--- PAGE 109 ---
f units Sunshine After Rain

d. Sequence of Adverbs

if there are two or more adverbs after the verb, adverb of manner comes first,
followed by adverbs of place and time. Verb

Ayesha performed brilliantly at the Youth Conference last Saturday.

1. Underline the adverbs in the following sentences and state their kind.
1. | went to the market in the morning.

2. The dog sat lazily in the shade of the tree.

3. | often visit my grandparent.

4. It is extremely hot today.

5. She is standing outside.

ii. Rearrange these sentences below to make meaningful sentences with correct
sequence of adverbs.

i. always / the / Sunday / make / on / nny / breakfast

ii. friends / plays / the / with / she / her /-in / often / park

iii. bed / makes / he / his / never

iv. sometimes / on / play / we / Sunday / cricket

v. hardly / the / watch / they / TV / afternoon / ever / in

vi. o'clock / always / up / | / at / get / seven

vii.have / lunch / fish / seldom / for / we

--- PAGE 110 ---
F unit’ 9 Sunshine After Rain

2. Pronoun Antecedent

A ‘pronoun antecedent’ is a word that comes before a pronoun to which the pronoun
refers.

Example:

his oan Wes eutdrg BOUT Pe son.

The woman said that her husband was not feeling well.
The players were concerned about their performance.

The word “antecedent” means something that precedes something else. In
language, it is the word that.a pronoun refers back to. Since the pronoun replaces the
noun, it has to agree in number, So, if the antecedent, or word that comes before, is
singular, then the pronoun that takes its place must also be singular.

It can be confusing if there are several words between the pronoun and its antecedent.
These words or clauses have no bearing onthe words and they need to be ignored.
Following are some special situations with examples of the correct way to have pronoun
antecedent agreement.

a) Singular Indefinite Pronouns

The singular indefinite pronouns take a singular antecedent. They refer to a single

unspecified person or thing or to one collective group.

Examples:

Each of these gadgets has its own pros and cons.

Everybody came in his or her car.

b) Indefinite Pronouns
The plural indefinite pronouns which include: several, few, both, many, and others
are always plural in context, and would always require plural pronouns.
Examples:
Several applicants submitted their application for the vacancy.
Few of us have contacted our sponsors.
c) Two nouns or Pronouns Joined by ‘and’

When faced with an antecedent that consists of two nouns or pronouns joined
by the word and, the principle is to use a plural pronoun.

TS 110 ERT

--- PAGE 111 ---
F unit | Sunshine After Rain

Examples:

Laraib and Beena said they will go to the mall together.
You and | must study harder before the commencement of our exams.

d) Nouns Joined by Or or Nor

« When faced with two nouns that are both plural, the principle is to use a
‘plural pronoun.
* If you come across two nouns that are both singular, use a singular pronoun.
+ When the antecedent consists of one noun that is singular and another one
that is plural, make the pronoun agree with the nearest noun.
Examples:
Either the Lahore Qalanders or the Karachi Kings will be scheduled to play their
matches come next Tuesday.
Neither Ali nor Saleem was ready to lend me his book.
Neither my purse nor my keys are where | left them.

e) Collective Nouns
Most collective nouns including committee, family, group, and team have singular
form, but may take singular or plural pronouns. However, when the group acts as a
unit, use a singular pronoun.
Examples:
The committee submitted_its report on the missing fund today.
The jury reached its verdict earlier today.
1) Determine which pronoun best fits the pronoun-antecedent agreement rule:
i. Somebody dropped (their/his or her) wallet.
ii. Some of the girls sang (their/her) favorite song.
iii. Omer or Ali left (their/his) sunglasses on the table in the dining area.
-iv. Neither Hina nor Huma studied (their/his or her) spelling words.
v. Everybody must wash (their/his or her) hands before dinner.
vi. One of the buildings lost (their/its) electricity yesterday afternoon.
2) Punctuate the given lines.

i. if you can fill the unforgiving minute

ii. with sixty seconds worth of distance run

--- PAGE 112 ---
Sunshine After Rain

iii. yours is the Earth and everything thats in it_.oo SEE

iv. and which is more you ll be a Man my son

3) Use the given phrasal verbs in sentences.
a ae

go out

go over.

grow apart

grow back —— en

grow into chaise tinamiagmitaete

a) Summarizing a poem:

Summarizing involves the ability of readers to pull together, or synthesize information
in a poem so as to explain in their own words what the poem is about. Summarizing is
an important strategy because it can enable readers to recall the poem quickly. It also
can make readers more aware of text organization, of what is important in a text and
of how ideas are related. Use the following steps while summarizing a poem:

oO Read the poem carefully
Identify the poem's main ideas
Identify the poem's structure
Identify the poem's imagery
Write a summary of the poem
Proofread and edit the summary

oo°0o 8 8

Now using the above knowledge, write a summary of the poem “Sunshine after Rain”.

--- PAGE 113 ---
Sunshine After Rain

b) Using the given mind map, write an expository essay covering all the main points.
You can add more points from yourself (i.e problems created due to drug addiction)

Teacher's Point
m + Help students to develop the topic thoroughly by selecting the most significant and
pi. relevant facts, extended definitions, concrete details, quotations, or other
information and examples appropriate to the audience's knowledge of the topic.

--- PAGE 114 ---
The Small Woman:

The Heroic Story of Gladys Aylward

_by Alan Burgess (a biography) ‘ sg a

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

* read with accurate pronunciation, appropriate pitch and voice variation suitable for fictional and
nonfictional texts

* ask and answer higher-order questions to guide/assess reading

* evaluate how authors use language, including figurative language, considering the impact on the
reader

* evaluate the particular elements of a story or drama (e.g., how the setting shapes the characters cr
plot)

* read, view and analyse a variety of reading grade-appropriate and high-interest books and texts
from print and non-print sources: (formal letter, biography, news article)

* gather relevant information from multiple authentic available resources following research ethics
to write and present their assignment

* engage effectively in a range of collaborative discussions (one-on-one, in groups, and teacher-led)
with diverse partners on grade-level topics, texts, and issues

+ identify and use compound prepositions and prepositional phrases in writing

* write formal letters and emails to people in extended academic (professional) environments for
various purposes

* write a descriptive composition (giving physical description and characteristics/traits of a
person/object/place moving from general to specific), using correct punctuation and spelling, by
using the process approach - brainstorming, mind mapping, and writing a first draft

English-11 Federal ISB Sig8 SideB Process Mage/itt/B@2024024:052B:22

--- PAGE 115 ---
ss The Small Woman: The Heroic Story of Gladys Aylward

Pre-Reading
- What do you know about Japan and China?
- Can participatory citizenship be beneficial for us?

The Small Woman:
The Heroic Story of Gladys bial

The Chinese Nationalist officer was —
commanding the platoon. Scouting on the
wrong side of the river, he looked back at
the section of men straggling along behind
him.

His wandering thoughts suddenly jarred
to a standstill. A noise! An odd noise! A
far-off, high pitched sound, wavering and
uncertain. A plane? His men thought so.
He watched them rolling their eyes round the cloudless sky in an effort to locate it.
There had been an unusual air activity up-and down the Yellow River for the past
week. Usually the Japanese planes patrolled and fired at anything that moved.

And yet this sounded almost high and momentous. He shook his head as though to
clear it. The river at this point was a mile wide; there might be children left in the village
on the other side of the river. Perhaps they were at school; but their voices carry this far.
He mounted a slight rise, crawling carefully on the top.
He raised himself to see better, and grunted in
astonishment. He reached for his binoculars and
focused. It was an astonishing sight. A great crowd of eo
children were assembled on the bank, all seated in a What i gs ale in the/platoon
circle and singing loudly. Some smaller ones were
splashing and jumping in the shallows.

He mentioned his men back with a hand signal. “Wait here”, he said. “it may bea
trick. Be alert”.

The Japanese had driven refugees before them on many other occasions. And who were
these children? All refugees had left this area days ago. The river was officially closed. As
he walked along the bank, he could clearly see that they were Chinese children. They saw
him, the young ones, and raced towards him, gurgling and shouting with delight. They
screamed, “Here's a soldier. Asoldier!”.

While-reading

115

--- PAGE 116 ---
The Small Woman: The Heroic Story of Gladys Aylward

A young officer noticed a small woman sitting on the ground. She was thin and hungry-
looking. She got to her feet as he approached, and with a shock of surprise, he
realized that she was a foreigner. .

‘Are you mad?’ he said. ‘Who are
you?

‘We are refugees trying to reach
Sian’, she said simply.

Her Chinese was excellent.
Although, she was small like own
country- woman, and her hair
dark, he knew she was a
foreigner.

This will soon be a battlefield’, he

said wearily.
Gladys Aylward wich vomse of the chikiren before tbey crossed the mountains vo Sian

‘Are you in charge of these
children?’, he asked

‘Yes, | am in charge of them. We were trying to cross the river’, she said.

He looked at her directly. She was quite a young woman. Her dark hair were scrapped
back into a bun, her clothes old and soiled; there were dark circles under her eyes, and
her face had a swallow, unhealthy look.

‘You are a foreigner?’, he enquired.

d

‘Yes, | am a foreigner’. ‘While-reading

‘For a foreigner-you chose a strange occupation’, he
said suspiciously.

hy did the officer think the
yman was a foreigner?
She looked steadily at him as he said, ‘I think | can get a J

boat. It will need three journeys to take you all across, and it is dangerous. If a Japanese
plane comes over when you are half way cross, there will be little hope.’

‘We must cross the river’, she said.

‘You will probably manage to get food in the village on the other side. The people do not
like to leave their homes even when the Japanese come’, the soldier said.

‘| understand’, she said. ‘It was like that in Yang-cheng’.

He walked to the river edge, whistled loudly three times in peculiar, piercing manner.
From across the river came three answering whistles. Two little figures far away on the
other bank pushed a boat into the water and began to row it across.

lite)
aS

letmntints 44 Cadaern| ICD Cln0 Clon A Denna Denk OA/DAOIN nN ALM .99

--- PAGE 117 ---
F unit 10 | The Small Woman: The Heroic Story of Gladys Aylward

‘l cannot thank you enough,’ she said. ‘I thought it'was the end of us when we could not
cross the river’.

The young officer noticed her sway a little as one of the children pushed against her. ~

He looked at her cautiously. "You are ill', he said. ‘You should find a doctor. The Nationalist
troops on the other side of the river will have a doctor.’

‘lam alright ', she said. When we get to Sian, | shall be alright’. The soldiers ferried them
rapidly to the other side. They returned and more of the children piled it. On the third
journey the soldier helped the small woman into the boat with the last group of children.

His platoon ad gathered round to help. As the boat moved away from the bank, he
called his men to attend and salute the children. He called, ‘Good luck, foreigner!',

He turned to walk back along the bank to his platoon. As he walked, he looked into
the sky, and listened for the drone of Japanese planes. None came. If this had been close
to a large city or a settlement, he could have understood it, but wandering across a
battlefield escorting an army of ragged Chinese children; that was , indeed , very curious
and satisfying
The above is an excerpt from the biography cal led “The Small Woman: The Heroic Story
of Gladys Aylward” by Alan Burgess (1957).

Alan Burgess 7 February 1915 - 10” April 1998) was an English Royal Air Force pilot
and author who wrote several biographical and non-fiction books between the 1950s
and the 1970s.

He wrote biography of Gladys Aylward, a British born Christian missionary, who
worked in China. Aylward became a national of the Republic of China in 1936 and
was a revered figure among the people, taking in orphans and adopting several
herself. In 1938, the region was invaded by Japanese forces, and Aylward led more
than 100 orphans to safety over the mountains, despite being wounded and sick,
personally caring for them. She moved to British-administered Hong Kong, and
finally settled in Taiwan in 1958. There, she. founded the Gladys Aylwarg
Orphanage, [9] where she worked until her death in 1970.

* Why did the platoon commander ask his soldiers to salute Med children
at the end?

PITTy

--- PAGE 118 ---
t
'
'

Unit 10 The Smalt Woman: The Heroic Story of Gladys Aylward

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give
synonyms of each in the given column. The first one is done for you. Also use these words

in your own sentences.
Meanings [Synonyms

an instrument that makes the objects seem nearer | field or opera glasses
and clearer

hair twisted into a round shape at the back of the
head

a strong desire to know about something

ferried to carry people or goods in a boat
gurgling | boat that carries people

jarred to have an unpleasant and annoying effect
platoon | agroup of soldiers that is apart of a company

old and torn clothes

pulled hair tightly at the back, away from the face

sscull | small oars used to row a boat

straggling | the last or slowest person moving ina group
to move slowly from side to side

a. Read the story carefully anc answer the following questions:

1. What is the officer's main responsibility and concern when he encounters the
children and the foreign woman by the river?

What is the setting of the story?

3. Describe the foreign woman's appearance and her reason for being with the
children.

Why does the officer consider it dangerous for the group to cross the river?
5. How does the officer's attitude towards the foreign woman change throughout
the passage, and why do you think it changes?

6. In your opinion, what might be the symbolic significance of this encounter
between the officer, the children, and the foreign woman during wartime?

118 c tr Soe MN. --

men eee ee St

--- PAGE 119 ---
er

b. Answer the given short questions by choosing the correct answer:
i. The Chinese Nationalist officer became suspicious when he noticed a group of
children singing loudly on the other side of the river, especially because:
a) the children were refugees fleeing from the Japanese.
b) the river was officially closed, and all refugees had left the area.
c) the Japanese had driven refugees before them in similar situations.
d) the officer recognized some of the children as his own.
ii. The foreign woman, in charge of the children, was attempting to cross the river
to reach Sian because:
a) she was a foreign spy.
b) she.was trying to escape from the Japanese.
c) she believed there would be food in the village on the other side.
d) she wanted to join the Nationalist troops on the other side for safety.
iii. The soldier helped the foreign woman and the children cross the river because:
a) he wanted to gather information about the foreign woman.
b) he was sympathetic to their plight and offered assistance.
c). he was ordered to do so by his superiors.
d) he planned to capture them once they reach the other side.

The Small Woman: The Heroic Story of Gladys Aylward

c. Read the story and fill the given table below eith the elements of
the story, “The Smal! Woman”

Characters

Point of view
Theme

_ 7

7 oe
LOD

We are member of a globa! community, making this planet our home and all the people
living on it our community. SDG stands for Sustainable Development Goals, which are a set
of 17 global objectives adopted by all United Nations member states in 2015 as part of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. These goals serve as a universal call to action to
end poverty, protect the planet, and ensure prosperity for all by the year 2030. The 17 goals
can be seen in the psoter shared below. These goals are designed to address serious global
challenges and provide a charter for governments and common people to collaborate and
work towards a more sustainable and equitable future.

el Se ee 119

--- PAGE 120 ---
The Small Woman: The Heroic Story of Gladys Aylward

The SDGs aim to promote economic
growth while safeguarding the
environment and ensuring that no
one is left behind, leaving a lasting
impact on people and the planet for
generations to come.

. Biscum how the SDGs are interconnected. For example, how achieving Goal 1 (No
Poverty) Canpositively impact Goal 2 (Zero Hunger) and Goal 4 (Quality Education).

* Arrange a speech competition in your class. Divide the 17 SDGs mentioned in the
poster among students. Ask them to read and collect information Om the selected
SDG. Don’t forget’to:mention the role of young people in achieving the SDGs. The
hold the speech competition, where each participant will have 2-3 minutes to talk
about his selected SDG.

=e

| 1. Cataphoric reference: (Forward Reference)
Cataphoric reference means that a word in a text refers to another later in the text
and you need to look forward to understand..It can be compared with anaphoric

_reference, which means a word refers back to another word for its meaning.

| For example:

When he arrived, Ali noticed that the door was open..(he refers to Ali) ;
If you want them, there are cookies in the kitchen. (Them refers to cookies)
2. Anaphoric reference: (Backward Reference)
Anaphoric reference means that a word in a text refers back to other ideas in the
text for its meaning. It can be compared with cataphoric reference, which means a
word refers to ideas later in the text.
For example:
Sana dropped the plate. It shattered loudly. (it refers back to plate)
The music stopped, and that upset everyone. (that refers back to stopping of
music)

1) Indicate peat and cataphoric references used in the sentences below:
i. When he arrived home, Naseem went to sleep.
ii. | went out with Ayesha on Sunday. She looked beautiful.
iii. Samuel left because he was tired.
iv. | can’t believe it. We won!

A

--- PAGE 121 ---
F unit 10 The Small Woman: The Heroic Story of Gladys Aylward

v. Alarge grey cat was lying on the stairs, and | had to step over it. vi. If you
want some, here's some strawberry ice-cream.

vii. After he had received his orders, the soldier left the building.

viii. If you want them, there are cookies in the kitchen.

2) Read the text of the story carefully and find cataphoric and anaphoric
references from it.

3.Preposition:

A preposition is a word or group of words used before a noun, pronoun, or noun
phrase to show direction, time, place, location, spatial relationships, or to
introduce an object, Some examples of prepositions are: - “in”, “at”, “on”, “of” and
“to”. Prepositions in English are highly idiomatic.

Types of Preposition

Prepositions of Time: - Prepositions of time show the relatioaship of time between
the nouns to the other parts of a sentence. On, at, in, from, to, for, since, ago,
before, till/until, by, etc. are the most common preposition of time.

For Example:

He started working at 10 AM.

She has been ill since Monday.

Prepositions of Place and Direction: - Prepositions of place show the relationship
of place between the nouns to the other parts of a sentence. On, at, in, by, from,
to, towards, up, down, acrdss, between, among, though, in front of, hehind, above,
over, under, below, etc. are the most common prepositions of place/direction.

For Example:

The police broke into the house.

| live across the river.

Prepositions of Agents or Things: - Prepositions of agents or things indicate a
causal relationship between nouns and other parts of the sentence. Of, for, by,
with, about, etc. are the most used and common prepositions of agents cr things.
For example:

This article is about smartphones.

Most of the guests have already left.

Phrasal Prepositions: - A phrasal preposition is not a prepositional phrase, but they
are a combination of two or more words which functions as a preposition. Along
with, apart from, because of, by means of, according to, in front of, contrary to, in
spite of, on account of, in reference to, in addition to, in regard to, instead of, on
top of, out of, with regard to, etc. are the most common phrasal prepositions.

For example:

They along with their children went to Atlanta

According to the new rules, you are not right. |

) Saat |

--- PAGE 122 ---
unit 10 |) The Small Woman: The Heroic Story of Gladys Aylward

a) Choose the correct preposition for time and place.

|. They caught the fugitive_____ the corner of the street. (in, on, at)

ii. He will wait three o'clock; then he'll have to leave. (since, until, still)
iii. They are rarely home at lunch time. (up, towards, at)
‘iv. I'llbe home 10 minutes. (before, by, until)

b) identify preposition of agent and direction in the given sentences.
|. He was-hit by a ball.
ii. Put it inside the house.
iii. His success results from careful planning.
iv. They drove through-the tunnel.
c) Underline phrasal preposition in the given sentences.
|. In spite of his hard work, he failed the test.
ii. According to the doctors, smoking can cause cancer.
iii. | am standing here on behalf of my colleagues.
d) Punctuate the given lines,
are you mad he said who are you?

we are refugees trying to reach sian she said simply

i a oe

e) Use the following phrasal verbs in sentences.
grow up

hand out

hand over

hang in

hang on

hang up

--- PAGE 123 ---
F unit 10] The Small Woman: The Heroic Story of Gladys Aylward

Letter of Complaint:

A complaint letter is written with the aim and hope of finding a suitable solution for a
problem that has not been resolved. There are various problems faced by people. Making
complaints to bring these problems to the attention of the higher authorities is the only
way to resolve the problems.

Making complaints against someone is never easy, and doing it in writing is far more
challenging because everything would be recorded. In light of this, extreme caution
should be used while writing a complaint letter.

Format of a complaint Letter:

on address

DD/MM/YY

_ Receiver’s address

|

Subject:
Sir/Ma'am, (Salutation)
* Body of the Letter explaining the reason tor your letterand the
complaint.
+ State the issue and its causes
* State the problems arising from the issue
| « Give some suggestion/ recommendations

Thanking you.
Yours faithfully, |
XYZ .

A sample complaint letter is shared below. Look at the different parts and also observe
the formal style and language used.

--- PAGE 124 ---
4

of Gladys Aylward

City, ABC,
17® January, 2016.

ir,

I would like to bring into your notice the extremely

bad condition of the drainage system of my locality.

Here are some facts for your consideration:

© The underground drains along the smaller roads
or street get chocked every second or third
month with dirty water overflowing from the
manholes.
The rainwater is not properly drained out with
the result that roads and streets get broken. The
flooded roads become a great problem for traffic.
The clothes of passersby get soiled and their
movement becomes risky.

It is suggested that the present drainage system be
cleaned thoroughly and repaired completely. New
drains should be dug where necessary.

Lhope you will try to solve this grave problem at
your earliest.
*

Waiting for a fayourable response.

Yours sincerely,
xYZ

| 1. Now keeping the above format in mind, write a letter to the Chairman FBISE about
‘correction of the spellings of your father’s name in your Secondary School Certificate.

« Read on the life and achievements of Bilqees Edhi
and her contribution to the welfare of orphans in
Pakistan and write a tribute to pay homage to her.
One of the articles to read:

Teacher's Point

Engage the students to participate in extended discussions and critique taking into account other speakers’
: viewpoints and presenting one's own with clarity.
'+ Explain the format of formal letters and emails to people in extended academic (professional) environments for

various purposes
+ Help the students to search SDGs over the internet. Explain the 17 goals briefly.

--- PAGE 125 ---
a <a"

. Sam

The Three Questions” —

By Leo Tolstoy

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

* engage in extended discussions and take into account other speaker's viewpoints and presenting
one’s own with clarity identify the narrator and Understand narrator’s point of view

* add verbs in glossary

* respond to questions on a range of communicative skills discuss characters and themes of the

. specific story

* give an informal personal and analytical response to a text and provide some supporting textual
reference comprehend the story and answer questions appended to the text

* understand modal verbs and their use in a sentence

* use precise words and phrases, telling details, and sensory language to convey a vivid picture of
the experiences, events, settings and/or characters understand , identify conjunctions , their
function and kinds

* use pre-reading and while-reading strategies to analyze and explore different layers of meaning
read and use inference and deduction to recognize implicit meaning.

* punctuate a given text of a more complex level.

* understanding silent letters, use punctuation marks correctly understand and use noun and its
kinds. Be familiar with more antonyms and their use in a sentence

* consult general reference materials; dictionary, thesaurus for precise Meaning/information
understand and use phrasal verbs in sentences

* interpret the use of transitional devices in writing write a paragraph coherently

* write informative texts to convey complex ideas, concepts of the content narrate a typical
day/event of one’s life

--- PAGE 126 ---
The Three Questions: By Leo Tolstoy

rs
”
.

- What is the basic function of a story?
- Recap the elements of a story as done in the earlier lessons.
- Being civil with others is a vital part of our religion.

Give an example from Islamic history.

It once occurred to a certain king that if he always knew the
right time to begin everything; if he knew who were the
right people.to tisten to, and whom to avoid; and, above all,
if he always knew what was the most important thing to do,
he would never fail in anything he might undertake.

And this thought having occurred to him, he had it
proclaimed throughout his kingdom that he would give a
great reward to anyone who would teach him what was the right time for every action,
and who were the most necessary people, and how he might know what was the most
important thingtodo. _

And learned men came to the king, but they all answered his questions differently.

In reply to the first question, some said that to know the right time for every action, one
must draw up in advance a table of days, months,
and years, and must live strictly according to it. Only
thus, said they, could everything be done at its
proper time. Others declared that it was impossible
to decide beforehand the right time for every
action, but that, not letting oneself be absorbed in
idle pastimes, one should always attend to all that
was going on, and then do what was most needful.
Others, again, said that however attentive the king
might be to what was going on, it was impossible for
one man to decide correctly the right time for every
action, but that he should have a council of wise men who would help him to fix the proper
time for everything.

But then again others said there were some things which could not wait to be laid before a
council, but about which one had at once to decide whether to undertake them or not.
But in order to decide that, one must know beforehand what was going to happen. It is
only magicians who know that; and, therefore, in order to know the right time for every
action, one must consult magicians.

While-reading

(» _ Guess the theme of the story.
« Has any question bothered
student's mind for long?
* Has any of the students ever come
into contact with a hermit?

RT SE TES 126

--- PAGE 127 ---
F unit 11 | ; —— The Three Questions: By Leo Tolstoy

Equally various were the answers to the second question. Some said the people the king
most needed were his councilors; others, the priests; others, the doctors; while some
said the warriors were the most necessary.

To the third question, as to what was the most important occupation, some replied that,
the most important thing in the world was science. Others said it was skill in warfare; and
others, again, that it was religious worship.

er.

All the answers being different, the king agreed with none of them, and gave the reward
to none. But still wishing to find the right answers to his questions, he decided to consult a
hermit, widely renowned for his wisdom.

The hermit lived in a wood which he never quitted, and
he received hone but common folk. So the king put on
simple clothes and, before reaching the hermit’s cell,
dismounted from his horse. Leaving his bodyguard
behind, he-went on alone. =

When the king approached, the hermit was digging the ground in front of his hut. Seeing
the king, he greeted him and went on digging. The hermit was frail and weak, and each

While-réeading (e

7 J
Why did the king put on simple
clothes?

--- PAGE 128 ---
PSunit 11] The Three Questions: By Leo Tolstoy

time he stuck his spade into the ground and turned a little earth, he breathed heavily.

The king went up to him and said: “Il have come to you, wise hermit, to ask you to answer
three questions: How can | learn to do the right thing at the right time? Who are the
people | most need, and to whom should |, therefore, pay more attention than to the rest?
And, what affairs are the most important and need my first attention?”

The hermit listened to the king, but answered nothing. He just spat on his hand and
recommenced digging.

“You are tired,” said the king, “let me take the spade and work awhile for you.”
“Thanks!” said the hermit, and, giving the spade to the king, he sat down on the ground.

When he had dug two beds, the king stopped and repeated his questions. The hermit
again gave no answer, but rose, stretched out his hand for the spade, and said:

“Now rest awhile - and let me work a bit.”

But the king did not give him the spade, and continued | .
to dig. One hour passed, and another. The sun began to While-reading

sink behind the trees, and the king at last stuck the What did the king say t the
spade into the ground, and said:“! camesto you, wise | wise man?
man, for an answer to my questions. If you can give me
none, tell me so, and | will return home.”

“Here comes someone running,” said the hermit. “Let us see who it is.”

el 128 eae ee eS ee

--- PAGE 129 ---
F unit 14. The Three Questions: By Leo Tolstoy

The king turned round and saw a bearded man come running out of the wood. The man
held his hands pressed against his stomach, and blood was flowing from under them.
When he reached the king, he fell fainting on the ground, moaning feebly. The king and
the hermit unfastened the man’s clothing. There was a large wound in his stomach. The
king washed it as best he could, and bandaged it with his handkerchief and with a towel
the hermit had. But the blood would not stop flowing, and the king again and again
removed the bandage soaked with warm blood, and washed and re-bandaged the wound.
When at last the blood ceased flowing, the man revived and asked for something to drink.
The king brought fresh water and gave it to him. Meanwhile the sun had set, and it had
become cold. So the king, with the hermit's help, carried the wounded man into the hut
and laid him on the bed. Lying on the bed, the man closed his eyes and was quiet; but the
king was so tired from his walk and from the work he had done that he crouched down on
the threshold, and also fell asleep - so soundly that he slept all through the short summer
night.

When he awoke in the morning, it was long before he could remember where he was, or

who was the strange bearded man lying on the bed and gazing intently at him with shining
eyes.

“Forgive me!” said the bearded man in a weak voice, when he saw that the king was
awake and was looking at him.

“I do not know you, and have nothing to forgive you for,” said the king.
“You do not know me, but | know you. | am that enemy of yours who swore to revenge

--- PAGE 130 ---
The Three Questions: By Leo Tols

Uniti1°

himself.on you, because you executed his brother and seized his property. | knew you had
gone alone to see the hermit, and | resolved to kill you on your way back. But the day
passed and you did not return. So | came out from my ambush to find you, and came upon
your bodyguard, and they recognized me, and wounded me. | escaped from them, but
should have bled to death had you not dressed my wound. | wished to kill you, and you
have saved my life. Now, if | live; and if you wish it, | will serve you as your most faithful
slave, and will bid my sons do the same. Forgive me!”.

- The king was very glad to have made peace with his
enemy so easily, and to have gained him for a friend,
and he not only forgave him, but said he would send his
servants and his own physician to attend him, and
promised to restore his property.

Having taken leave of the wounded man, the king went out into the porch and looked
around for the hermit. Before going away he wished once more to beg an answer to the
questions he had put. The hermit was outside, on his knees, sowing seeds in the beds that
had been dug the day before.

The king approached him and said, “For the last time, | pray you to answer my questions,
wise man.”

While-reading

What made the king feel happy?

“You have already been answered!” said the hermit, still crouching on his thin legs, and
looking up at the king, who stood before him.

“How answered? What do you mean?” asked the king.

“Do you not see?” replied the hermit. “If you had not pitied my weakness yesterday, and
had not dug these beds for me, but had gone your way, that man would have attacked
you, and you would have repented for not having stayed with me. So the most important
time was when you were digging the beds; and | was the most important man; and to do
me good was your most important business. Afterwards, when that man ran to us, the
most important time was when you were attending to him, for if you had not bound up his
wounds he would have died without having made peace with you. So he was the most
important man, and what you did for him was your most important business. Remember
then: there is only one time that is important - now! It is the most important time because
it is the only time when we have any power. The most necessary person is the one with
whom you are, for no man knows whether he will ever have dealings with anyone else:
and the most important affair is to do that person good, because for that purpose alone
was man sent into this life.

Post-reading }-

+ What is the most important time in the life of a man?

eI ee et a
laren 4 ere? er ne es

ates Ta
P SLOTAE < o } tt 2a seamen as

--- PAGE 131 ---
unit i The Three Questions: By Leo Tolstoy

About the Writer

Count Lev Nikolayevich Tolstoy (September 9, 1828- November 20, 1910) usually
referred to in English as Leo Tolstoy, was a Russian writer regarded as one of the
greatest authors of all time. He received nominations for the Nobel Prize in Literature
every year from 1902 to 1906 and for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1901, 1902, and 1909. His
fiction includes dozens of short stories such as"After the Ball” (1911), and several
novellas such as The Death of Ivan Ilyich (1886), Family Happiness (1859) and Hadji
Murad (1912). He also wrote plays and essays concerning philosophical, moral and
religious themes.
In writing a short story, the author chooses a character through whose eyes the reader
| sees the whole story. This character chosen by the writer is the narrator of the story and
it is infact this narrator's point of view that the author chooses to see and tell a story.
Narrator: The story is in a third-person narrative, told by an outsider not included in
the story.
Theme: This story deals with the theme of wisdom, kindness, acceptance, and
forgiveness. The story is based on the theme of knowledge because that is what the
king was looking for.
Moral: The most important time is the present moment. No deed is better than helping
others.
Summary: In the short story “Three Questions” Leo Tolstoy explores the theme of
wisdom, acceptance, kindness, and forgiveness. The three questions were asked by the
| king to wise hermit. The message of this story is the true purpose of life is to help
| others, The best time to live life is in the present time. Leo Tolstoy relates an
interesting story about a king who believes that if one knows the answers to three
particular questions, one would never fail in life. He seeks answers to these questions.
| The story is about his journey toward finding solutions.

—_— —— |

bi

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give
synonyms of each in the given column. The first one is done for you. Also use these words
in your own sentences.

Meanings ‘Synonyms |
announce officially or publicly. announced
persons with magical powers

a person living in solitude as a religious
discipline.

--- PAGE 132 ---
ES units1 | The Three Questions By Leo Tolstoy

dismounted | get off a horse, bicycle, oranythingthatoneis}|

riding.
spade a tool with a sharp-edged, metal blade and a
long handle, used for digging

approached | come near or nearer to ,contacted

recommenc
ed

stretcheds one's body to its full length

regain life, consciousness, or strength.

Answer the following

Discuss the three questions the king wanted answers for?

Was the-king happy with answers he got from people?

Describe the reason that led the king to the hermit?

Analyze what was the hermit doing when king approached him?
Who was the wounded man and how was he wounded?

Explain why did the wounded man tell the king that he forgave him?
Evaluate how did the noble deed of helping the hermit save the king's life.
Analyze how did the hermit provide answers to the three questions?

Does the story have inspiring undertone?

Are you inspired enough to follow the lesson of forgiveness, kindness and
ready acceptance of what comes in your way?

Yes Pe Por

—
=

--- PAGE 133 ---
P unit 11 | The Three Questions By Leo Tolstoy

b) Choose the correct answer:
i. What was the proclamation by the king?
a) announcement of a great reward
b) announcement of a severe punishment
c) announcement of his wedding
d) declaration of a war
ii. What kind of men came to the king for answers?
a) learned b) courtiers c) illiterate d) qualified

iii. Strike off the most important occupation not suggested as an answer to the third
question?

a) science b) warfare c) religious worship d) service

7 «ge Oral Communication

Activity
Arrange the class in groups to discuss the characters of the king and the hermit within
10 minutes by jotting down the comparison and contrast in both the characters.

Comment on the three questions that worry the King’s mind.

Class discussion —
Each group leader relate their points to the other groups thus fostering a healthy

“ j
™ ee RS : ons a) SZ... i ae il ee La

Vocabulary’and Grammar \

Modal Verbs: Just as the King’s life was saved by helping the hermit similarly connected to
the idea are special kinds of helping verbs which are discussed as under.

Modal verbs

The modal verbs are special kinds of helping verbs that ge
include can, must, may, might, will, would, should. They are ge” ya
used with the main verbs to express ability, obligation, .
possibility, willingness thus signifying the mood of the -
subject. Below is a list showing the most useful modals and
their most common meanings:

--- PAGE 134 ---
The Three Questions By Leo Tolstoy
> SRE er :

| Modal Meaning Example
can to express ability | can speak a Little Russian.
can torequest permission Can | open the window?
may toexpress possibility | may come late.
'may torequest permission May | sit down, please?
must toexpress obligation | must go now.
Must toexpressstrongbelief | She must be really hungry by now.
should to give advice You should avoid argument.
would to request or offer Would you like a cup of tea?
would in if-sentences if | were you, | would say sorry.

Modal verbs are unlike other verbs. They do not change their form (spelling) and they
have no infinitive or participle (past/present). The modals must and can need
substitute verbs to.express obligation or ability in the different tenses.

Future You'll have to work hard if you want to pass the exams.
Infinitive \don't want to have to go. !
Past simple | couldn’t/wasn't able to walk until | was 3 years old. |
Present perfect | haven't been able to solve this problem. Can you help?
Future I'm not sure if I will be able to come to your party.

Infinitive | would love to be able to play the piano.

Modals are auxiliary verbs. They do not need an additional auxiliary in negatives or
questions. For example: Must | come? (Do | must.come?), or: He shouldn't smoke (He |
doesn't should smoke). This kind of use is wrong.

—_—_—__—— ——$$__—_—_ - --———_—_———_—-- - —-

a) Choose the correct answer for each blank.

1-____——_—sdou speak French? - Only a few words, but my English is pretty good.
a-Can b -Could c-May
2-You______———s eat so much sweets. It’s not good for you.
a- don't have to b- mustn't c- shouldn't
3-I|_____——_—ttalk already before | was two years old.
a- could b - should c- would
4-|_____—sihelp you, but | don't want to.
a- can b - could c- would
5-__ sour open the window, please.
a- Can b- May c- would
6-If you continue to practice so hard, you beat me before too long!
a- can b - could c - will be able to

GE A 134 2 oes

--- PAGE 135 ---
ae te a Se penne

*

Conjunctions: Conjunctions are bridging words that link other words, phrases, or

clause in a sentence making it completely understandable and coherent. -For
example: but, and, yet, or, because, nor, although, since, unless, while, where etc.
_ She bought a shirt and a book. , ,
| She went to doctor because she was ill.
| She came but she was very late.
He operated upon the patient in emergency since he was in an excessive pain.
Using conjunctions helps form elegant and flowing prose while avoiding the
incoherence of single idea sentences.
| Types of Conjunctions :
_ Coordinating Conjunctions
Coordinating conjunctions are words like “and,” “nor, " or “so” and they link equal parts
of asentence, be it words, phrases, or independent clauses. For example:
He was late for school, so he took a shortcut. ,
Her favorite colors were purple andred.
Overall there are seven coordinating words which can be easily memorized by a simple
mnemonic FANBOYS which are as follows
+ For
» And
* Nor
* But
- Or
* Yet
* So
Examples:
* ltwantadrink ora juice with lunch.
+ Shirley writes short stories and novels.
_* lan go with you to the doctor but not to the hair dresser.
Subordinating Conjunctions
Subordinating conjunctions link a dependent clause to an independent clause words
such as “because”, "since" and “after”, help to show the relationship between the
two clauses and emphasize the main idea of the freestanding/independent clause .
Some of the common subordinating conjunctions form another easy to

and 130

--- PAGE 136 ---
E unit 11 | The Three Questions By Leo Tolstoy

| remember fun mnemonic ON A WHITE BUS:

, © O=once, only if
* N=now that
* A=as, although, after
* W-=while, when, whereas, whenever, wherever, whether
* H=how
+ l=if, in case, in order to, in the event that
* T-=though
| + E=eVvenif, even though
| « B= because, before ©
| « U-=unless, until
* §S=so0, so that, since, supposing
Examples of Subordinating Conjunctions in a Sentence
Below are a few examples of how to use a subordinating conjunction:
+ Because it was stormy, we had to cancel our journey .
+ My curtains were all wet after leaving the window ajar last night.
+ Unless | get over my fear of blood , Lwillnever become a doctor.
-Correlative Conjunctions

Correlative conjunctions work in pairs to join together words or phrases that have

equal importance within a sentence, like “either/or’,,"such/that" and "not only/but
| also”. There is a relationship between the two elements of the pair signifying matching
| or contrasting ideas For example:

You can have either chocolate or vanilla ice cream.

He not only plays the guitar but also the drums.

Here are some of the most commonly used pairs as conjunctions:
* Ejither/or
+ Neither/nor
+ Not only/but also
« So/as
« Whether/or

*« both/and

--- PAGE 137 ---
F unit 11 The Three Questions By Leo Tolstoy

While using correlative conjunction, place the correlative words immediately before
the words that need to connect. For examples:

* You can either sell it or rent it.

* Not only am | done cooking the meal, but | have also done cleaning my
kitchen.

+ Both my mother and brother are engineers.

b) Complete each sentence using the subordinating conjunction from the
parenthesis.

i. Ivisit the Badshahi Mosque | go to Lahore. (once, whenever, wherever)
ii. Thisisthe place_..__-_—>_—s We Stayed last time we visited. (where, when, how)
iii. sou win first place, you will receive a prize. (wherever, if, unless)

iv. You won't pass the test_. sr you study. (when, if, unless)

c) Complete each sentence using the correct correlative conjunction pair from the
parenthesis. :

i. Iplantotake my vacation. inJune_ sin July.
(whether / or, either / or, as:/ if)

ii. _____—id'm feeling happy_____ sad, I try to keep a positive attitude.
(either / or, whether / or, when / I'm)

iii. ___—s flowers trees grow during warm weather.
(not only / or, both / and, not / but)

iv. It's__———s goingtorain____—_—_—_—s snow tonight.
(as / if, either / or, as / as)

d) Complete each sentence using the correct coordinating conjunction from the

parenthesis.
i. Mycarhasaradio_____ a CD player. (but, or, and)
ii. Doyou like chocolate______—_ vanilla ice cream better? (or, nor, and)
iii. | have to go to work at six, ___ I'm waking up at four. (but, so, yet)

iv. Nadia doesn't like to drive, ______ she takes the bus everywhere. (but, yet, so)

7 ee

--- PAGE 138 ---
unit 11 | . ____ The Three Questions By Leo Tolstoy

e) Punctuate the given lines.
what does this charles look like my husband asked laurie whats his other name

he s bigger than me laurie said and he doesnt have any rubbers and he doesnt
ever wear a jacket

f) Give antonyms of the following.
casual fresh____ Ss Whisper
deprive quickly___—- ~~ ss widened

g) Use the given phrasal verbs in sentences.

keep on doing

keepout—

--- PAGE 139 ---
Unit 11_ The Three Questions By Leo Tolstoy

* Write a coherent paragraph about something extraordinary you witnessed, such
as a match or an accident (road /rail).

* How to write a story in 5 steps
1 Find inspiration. The first step in writing a story is coming up with an idea.
2 Brainstorm. Once you have an idea for a story, brainstorm. ...
3 Outline. Next, create an outline for your story. ...
4 Write the first draft. It's time to write. ...
5 Revise and edit your story.

* Write a story on your own using transitional words as first, next, then, after
that, finally to describe the sequence of the events in the story. Also
incorporate the following modal verbs in your sentences.

can could may might will
would must shall should ought to

Book report vs. Bookreview

A book review and a

Book R t k jew:
book report are two ec ad ace Book Review.

different types of writing | Simpie | Requres great telecast effort
that are often confused 1 Identical to book summary  oeeenetenten tee
| Narrates or re-tells the story
with each other. = Geer the book's conten
| Sums up the book plot and =
major themes =: = Under te pot
= Gp the man merge of the book
| 200-250 words ‘
— Ottertenestrong and werk
] Considered a K-12 level ‘des of fre book
assignment _ = Sheteyou paso oprson
= about the book
| 250-1000 words or more
| Collegetevel assignment or higher

intonation pattern understanding the correct pronunciation of the new vocabulary included
in the text.

* Help them in understanding and practicing the essential story building steps incorporating
modal verbs ,conjunctions and its kinds.

im * Help students in arranging a role play of the story in the class. Ask them to follow the

ee <A ee eee ween. aay veeer td

--- PAGE 140 ---
P unit 14) The Three Questions By Leo Tolstoy

Book Review

Feature [ook Review ———~SCS~*~*~i~ RRO
ose [To evant and cig book [To surmare and form abouta book

A book review is a Critical evaluation of a book. It should provide a summary of the plot,
characters, and themes, as well as an analysis of the author's writing style, strengths, and
weaknesses. The reviewer should also give their own opinion of the book and whether or not they
would recommend it to others.

Steps to write a book review:
+ Start with a strong introduction that grabs the reader's attention.
+ Provide a brief summary of the plot.
* Analyze the author's writing style and techniques.
+ Discuss the book's strengths and weaknesses.
+ Give your own opinion of the book and whetheror not you would recommend it to others.

Book Report
Abook report is a summary of a book. It should provide the basic information about the book, such
as the author, title, and plot, as well as the main ideas and arguments presented in the book. The
purpose of a book report is to inform the reader about the book, not to evaluate it.
Steps to write a book report:

+ Start with the bibliographic information about the book, such as the author, title, and

publisher.

+ Provide a brief overview of the plot.

+ Summarize the main ideas and arguments presented in the book.

* Discuss the book's significance and relevance.

+ Conclude with a brief summary of your overall impression of the book.

Activity
Take a book of your choice (either fiction or non- enon) .Write its review and a report by
following their steps separately.

--- PAGE 141 ---
UNIT 12

BREAK BREAK BREAK (POEM)

Lord Alfred Tennyson

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

* read with accurate pronunciation, appropriate pitch and voice variation suitable for fictional

and nonfictional texts. Recite, understand, interpret and analyze the poem and its
. characteristic features

* evaluate how authors use language, including figurative language, considering the impact on
the reader .Discuss others’ reading critically, taking account of their views. identify poetical
devices and use of figurative language

* ask and answer higher-order questions to guide/assess reading(e.g., Why is the author saying
this right now? Why did the author choose this word? How is this different from what | read
somewhere else? identify images and symbols used in the poem and their function in the
interpretation

* demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written communication
in varying identify figures of speech used in the poem specifically P

* use paraphrasing skills to paraphrase a poem

* use summary skills to write an objective summary of the given text and poem comprehend the
poem and answer questions appended to it

* summaries complex concepts, processes, or information by paraphrasing them using correct
language structure, transitional devices, own words and relevant punctuation marks. .
paraphrase and summarize the poem

* understand and identify interjections , their types and their usage

* punctuate given lines “

* understand and use phrasal verbs in sentences

--- PAGE 142 ---
Unit 12 - BREAK BREAK BREAK (POEM)

Pre-Reading
- Guess what the poem is about?
* Speculate on the title of the poem

Reading

Break, Break, Break,

On thy cold. gray stones, O Sea! - Skim for the main idea.
- Scan for specific information.
The thoughts that arise in me. - Draw a mind picture of the poem.

O, well:for-the fisherman's boy,

That he shouts with his sister at play!
O, well for the sailor lad,

That he sings in his boat on the bay!

And the stately ships go on

Alfred, Lord Tennyson (1809 - 1820) Alfred Tennyson, one of the most celebrated poets
of the Victorian Era was born in England. He was an enthusiastic reader and worked hard
to perfect his own craft as a poet. He composed short lyrics as well as longer works. In
1850 Lord Tennyson was named Poet Laureate of England. He wrote ‘Break Break Break ‘on
the death of his friend Arthur Henry Hallam who died at the young age of 22. The poemisa

To their haven under the hill;
But O for the touch of a vanished hand,
And the sound of a voice that is still!

i And-|-would that my tongue could utter - Summarize or paraphrase.

Break, break, break,

At the foot of thy crags, O-Sea!

But the tender grace of a day that is dead
Will never come back to me.

142

--- PAGE 143 ---
a IT a a ee ey

moving elegy that captures the pain and sorrow of losing a loved friend and the struggle to
come to terms with the loss. The poem expresses how Tennyson uses these elements to
express his grief.

Theme: Break Break Break is a short poem with an overridingly sad and nostalgic tone.
The poem presents a sea-side image, complete with a wild sea, playing children,
fishermen, sailors and sailing boats in the background of majestic ships. Tennyson
subtlety juxtaposes these elements with the sense of impermanence on the death of a
beloved friend

Speaker: The poet himself is the narrator

Poetic form: This poem is broken into four stanzas each of which is a quatrain. Each
quatrain is further broken down according to its rhyme scheme; ABCB where the second
and fourth lines always rhyme.

Summary: The poem isa short elegy that expresses the poet's personal sorrow against the
backdrop of a powerful ocean scene where despite his loss the affairs of the world go on

unperturbed.

* What does the poet mean by saying ‘the tender grace of a day”
)

Figures of Speech and Literary devices in BREAK BREAK BREAK

« Lines 1-2: The speaker uses apostrophe when he addresses the sea directly as
though it were capable of responding to him. He also uses repetition within the
first line, repeating the same word three times. The assonance in the second
line, or the repetition of that long “o" vowel sound ("cold,” “stones,” and "O")
helps to slow the reader down.

* Lines 9-10: The speaker uses alliteration in line 10 when he repeats the “h"
sound (“haven” and “hill"). The “stately ships” that go to their “haven under the
hill" might be a metaphor for coffins - going “under the hill" sounds a lot like
going underground, or being buried. As “stately” or fancy as these “ships” might
be, that doesn’t make us want to be passengers.

* Lines 13-14: The speaker repeats lines 1-2 almost exactly, again
apostrophizing the sea. Then, in the third stanza, we start to figure out why,he
can't talk: it's because his friend's “voice is still." Our speaker is all choked up on
grief that he doesn't know how to express.

--- PAGE 144 ---
F unit 12 | BREAK BREAK BREAK (POEM)

: Lines 3-4: The speaker uses synecdoche, or substituting a part of something for
the whole thing, when he wishes that his “tongue could utter." Because, yeah,
your "tongue" is the part that does the speaking, but not on its own, unless
you're talking in your steep or something. The speaker uses metaphor when he
says that his "thoughts" “arise,” since thoughts don't literally move around.

+ Lines 5-6: The “fisherman's boy” is “shout[ing]," but we do not know what he is
saying - it may be utter nonsense as he's playing with his sister. The “O" that
opens the line is just as empty of meaning as the shouts of the boy.

+ Linés 7-8: The sailor's song is likewise without words - we do not know what he is
singing; ” Again, the speaker's “O" that opens the line is just as meaningless. It is
as though the speaker is starting to wonder if utterances - shouts, songs, or
poems - haveany meaning at all.

+ Line 12: Ah, here is why the speaker is so down on utterances lately. It is

because of his friend’s “voice that is still." Again, he is using synecdoche by
imagining that his friend's “voice” stands in for the his friend who is dead.

hw

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give
synonyms of each in the given column. The first one is done for you. Also use these words ~
in your own sentences.

Words Meanings ~ Synonyms

thy your in archaic English ai your /

bay gulf, a deep inlet of the sea surrounded by land :

stately grand, majestic in appearance,

haven a place of safety or refuge 42 y ‘es ns bP si Z
crag a steep or rugged piece of rock face mE ee Pe  a

tender showinggentlenesskindnessoraffection = 21

GR, het, A ret ee Fy

eee ave eee ne nevevint ee wee er

--- PAGE 145 ---
Unit 12 | BREAK BREAK BREAK (POEM)

‘g_ Reading and Critical Thinking

a) Answer the following.
1. Analyze the speaker's perspective in the poem.
2. To whom is the poem addressed?
3. Comment on the effect produced by the use of repetition in the poem.
4. How do you analyze feeling of the poet in the first two lines?
5. Identify personification in the poem.
6. How is the poem a juxtaposition of transience and permanence?.
7. Comment.on.the images-and symbols used in the poem.
8. Evaluate as to where are the ships going.
9. Critically evaluate'the poet's notion of never coming back.

_
oO

. Identify personification, metaphors, anaphora, hyperbole, alliteration,
refrain, symbolism in the poem.

b) Choose the correct answer:

i. What is the phrase that suggests the poet's inability to express his grief?
a) cold gray stone b) fisherman's boy
c) stately ships go on d) never come back

ii. What is the fisherman's boy doing?
a) singing in his boat b) fishing with his father
c) sleeping under the sun d) shouting with his sister at play

iii. What are the phrases that signify the sense of loss.in the third stanza?
a) vanished hand, voice that is still b) the stately ships go on
c) sound of a voice d) haven under the hill

«, 2 Oral Communication

Discuss in groups the interpretation of the poem. Group leaders to relate their
interpretation to the rest of the class.

P activity

Recite the poem in the class room.”

THE FAREWELL

Flow down, cold rivulet, to the sea,
‘ Thy tribute wave deliver:

--- PAGE 146 ---
"Unit 12 BREAK BREAK BREAK (POEM)
orn 198 a oe oe Oo ee ee Lee

No more by thee my steps shall be,
Forever and forever.
Flow, softly flow, by lawn and lea,
Arivulet then a river:
Nowhere by thee shall my steps be
Forever and forever.
But here will sigh thine alder tree -
And here thine aspen shiver;
And here by thee will hum the bee,
Forever and forever.
A thousand suns will stream on thee,
Athousand moons will quiver;
But not by thee my steps shall be,
Forever and forever.

Alfred Lord Tennyson

interjection: - An interjection is a word or phrase that mainly expresses spontaneous or
abrupt feeling or emotion They can show happiness, surprise, anger, stress, impatience,
fright or hatred etc. While interjections are a part of speech but they are er
independent. For example:-

Wow! That bird is huge.
Uh-oh! | forgot to get gas.
. Shoot! I've broken a nail.
Oh! really? | didn't know that.
‘ We're not lost! We just need to go, um, this way.

The poem “Break Break Break” is a fine example of use of interjections. The powerful
emotions of loss in this case are represented by interjections for instance 'O Sea!’ and
‘the sound of a voice that is still!’.

rere

=nalish-11 Federal ISB Sia10 SideR Process Riank:N4/2A/2N22NPK-M5-99-99

--- PAGE 147 ---
F unit 12 BREAK BREAK BREAK (POEM)

Types of Interjections

Primary interjections

A primary interjection is a word or sound that can only be used as an interjection.
Primary interjections do not have alternative meanings and can't function as another part
of speech (i.e., noun, verb or adjective).

Primary interjections are typically just sounds without a clear etymology. As such, while
they sometimes have standard spellings, a single interjection may be written in different
ways (e.g., “um-hum” or “mm-hmm”).

Examples: Primary interjections in a sentence

Ugh! That's disgusting.

Um-hum! | think that could work.

We won the game. Yippee!

Secondary interjections

A secondary interjection is a word that is typically used as another part of speech (such
as a noun, verb, or adjective) that can also be used as an interjection.

Examples: Secondary interjections in a sentence
Goodness! That was a close one.

Shoot! My flight has been canceled. ‘
Awesome! Do that trick again.

Volitive interjections

A volitive interjection is used to give a command or make a request. For example, the
volitive interjection “shh” or “shush” is used to command someone to be quiet.

Examples: Volitive interjections in a sentence
Shh! | can't focus when you're singing.

Psst! Pass me an eraser.

Ahem! Please pay attention.

Emotive interjections

An emotive interjection is used to express an emotion or to indicate a reaction to
‘something. For example, the emotive interjection “ew” is used to express disgust.

Curse words, also called expletives, are commonly used (in informal contexts) as emotive
interjections to express frustration or anger.

Examples: Emotive interjections in a sentence
Ew! I'm not eating that.

ee en ee eee
MS ade

GG ae ee 147 DO

--- PAGE 148 ---
F unit 12 | BREAK BREAK BREAK (POEM)

Yay! I'm so excited to see you.

Yum! This apple pie is delicious.

Cognitive interjections

A cognitive interjection is used to express a thought or indicate a thought process.

For example, the cognitive interjection “um” can express confusion or indicate
that the speaker is thinking.

Examples: Cognitive interjections in a sentence

~> -

Um! can you. explain it once more?

Wow! | wasn't expecting that.

Eureka! I've solved the puzzle.

Greetings and parting words

Greetings and parting words/phrases are interjections used to acknowledge or
welcome someone’or to éxpress good wishes at the end of a conversation.
Examples: Greetings and partirig words/phrases in a sentence

Hey! How's life?

Hello! It's good to see you.

Bye! See you later!

See you soon! Drive safe.

Interjections and punctuation

How an interjection is punctuated depends gn the context and the intensity of the

emotion or thought being expressed.

Exclamation points are most commonly used along with interjections to
emphasize the intensity of an emotion, thought, or demand.

When the emotion or thought being expressed is less extreme, an interjection can
also be followed by a period. If an interjection is used to express uncertainty or to
ask a question, it should be followed by a question mark.

Examples: Interjections and punctuation

Oh! | don't know.

We've just won the lottery. Hurray!

Are you done .Hmm?

When an interjection is used as part of a sentence, it should be set off from the .

~~

--- PAGE 149 ---
F unit 12 BREAK BREAK BREAK (POEM)

ix
B
rest of the sentence using commas.
Examples: Interjections within a sentence
Hmm, how are we going to do this?
It was an interesting lecture, indeed.

The project is, uh, going well.

In the following sentences, identify the interjection and encircle it.
i. Hi, I'm glad that you could make it to my party.
ii. Wow! You look great tonight.
ii. That was the best performance that | have ever seen, bravo!
iv. Hmm, | wonder where | put my keys and wallet?

v. "Shoo, go away!" shouted the woman when she saw the cat licking milk from her
cereal bowl.

vi. | guess that's the end of the movie, darn.
vii. Stop! You should always wear a helmet when riding a bike.
viii. Yippee, | made this picture all by myself.

a) Summarize the poem “Break Break Break” highlighting the salient points
b) Justify how the theme of the poem goes with the thoughts given by the poet?
c) Which figurative speech has the poet used in the poem? Discuss.

--- PAGE 150 ---
BREAK BREAK BREAK (POEM

d) Punctuate the given lines.

flow down cold rivulet to the sea

thy tribute wave deliver

no more by thee my steps shall be

forever and for ever

e) Use the given phrasal verbs in sentences.

log in

log out

look after

look down on

look into

ey,

look forward

Teacher's Point
+ Reading between the lines, symbolism, interpretting on their own

BN + Readers rewriting the poem's meaning.
* Help the students see the key word for setting the tone and atmosphere of the poem
+ Askstudents to search and study about Tennyson and his other works.

_

--- PAGE 151 ---
: ee ‘
+ " : As aN
ke ie a . A 5
an o
titan: UNIT 13
tas :
Ths Saree es ;
" . aa? -< :
© _.™ >A ' - . ‘
- 4 - :
Pd eh, nm. a , :
% ate 4 : >
€Fr "
ee OP ie .” 4 » *4
“Fy +.
,:* if of i Mw a*¢ * - ~ a
cet y 7 i” ‘s ; . 2?
~~ ¥ 7 — + : .
mS a i « 4 = 7 .* +o ~ ae —— we,’ ¢
+ “Aw . + «4 Fo
‘ < _ me" - te 4 > > * s
a4 % 4 ~ Ya - — .
; . 7 aria > 9
° - **
. ‘~ ~ : *. “ Yee . © —_.
° > eT ~-A> ~ Ne
: y “~~ o “i é «* ;
- Jif . - ao * ~~ =
‘ / ts > 7 « *\ ". Aira oon nd
’ a. **
tee, *. sf Se wet. i te
. = Ax, ae ; ~*
id. be
; _ ble -
¢ we, Ls ¢ > o
+ o- .~
: ." ° =< > ~
. : + . .
o . | 5 ; ; 4 a + e
4 at A a La ye!
=: @f = .* Dies, ai
a a - ents
’ a — » a -
>) > ner" 9, eb? 2
". - A>. ot
me P ND hot Y.
.  %, t - ¥
: > 6 - _" Y ‘<i ~
= tT Seat
>
se Lh

Thou Winter Wind (poem) | e ‘

William Shakespeare pies A

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

read with accurate pronunciation, appropriate pitch and voice variation suitable for
fictional and nonfictional texts

demonstrate attentive listening’ skills while working in groups and taking turns to speak
with standard pronunciation

demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written
communication in varying understand and identify figures of speech

punctuate given lines

use phrasal verbs in sentences

evaluate how authors use language, including figurative language, considering the
impact on the reader .Discuss others’ reading critically, taking account of their views
use summary skills to write an objective summary of the given text and poem

use paraphrasing skills to paraphrase a poem

ask and answer higher-order questions to guide/assess reading

--- PAGE 152 ---
Sunita BLOW, BLOW, THOU WINTER WIND (POEM)

Pre-Reading

- Relate any incident when someone got a frost bite while
playing in snow?

- Guess what the poem is about from its title?

Reading ,
While-readi

Blow, Blow, Thou Winter Wind See coals
Thou art not so unkind + Analyze the content of the

=< ’ poem focusing on the title
As man's ingratitude; RCo Over immer arin
Thy tooth is not so keen, used in the poem
Because thou art not seen, <

Although thy breath be rude.

Heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! unto the green holly:
Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:
Then heigh-ho, the holly!

This life is most jolly.

Freeze, freeze thou bitter sky,

That does not bite so nigh

As benefits forgot:

Though thou the waters warp,

Thy sting is not so sharp

As a friend remembered not.

Heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! unto the green holly:
Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:
Then heigh-ho, the holly!

This life is most jolly.

' + What is feigning?

William Shakespeare

--- PAGE 153 ---
F unit 13 J BLOW, BLOW, THOU WINTER WIND (POEM)

William Shakespeare (bapt. 26 April 1564 - 23 April 1616) was an English playwright, poet, and
actor, widely regarded as the greatest writer in the English language and the world's greatest
dramatist. He is often called England's national poet and the “Bard of Avon. His extent works,
consist of some 39 plays, 154 sonnets, two long narrative poems, and a few other verses. His
plays have been translated into every major living language and are performed more often
than those of any other playwright. They also continue to be studied and reinterpreted.
Theme:“ This poem reflects the harm and misery those closest to us can inflict. Betrayal, fake
friendship and bitter realities of human relations are the major themes of the poem.
Throughout the poem the speaker compares the harsh winter with the negative behavior of
mankind .Forhim the harsh winter is less cruel than the cruelity of men.

Context: Blow, Blow, thou winter wind” is a poem from the Shakespeare's play ‘As You Like
It.'which is a song sung by Amiens ,a lord and follower of Duke Senior in the play .In the song
Amiens compares the harshness of the west wind to the ungraefulness of human beings, finding
the latter to be much more kind .

This poem is an example of a type of figurative language called personification. Shakespeare
reveals his true poem with the line “Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly.”by
looking down at man’s ingratitude and the idea that humans are two-faced. At the beginning of
the poem/song, Amiens speaks of the bitter cold winter wind. The wind can be unkind and blow
strong but it isn't as cruel as human society ” ’

©

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give
synonyms of each in the given column. The first one is done for you. Also use these words
in your own sentences.

Words Meanings Synonyms
warp a twist or distortion as a result of heat or cola

thou you in ancient English |

keen anxious ; des A iad

rude impolite, blunt, ill-mannered

folly foolishness sr.

a et a A a te awe |

a

--- PAGE 154 ---
F Unit 13%, | BLOW, BLOW, THOU WINTER WIND (POEM)

sting bite, wound
unto archaic term for to
bitter harsh

greenholly green holly tree is a symbol with the sharp
leaves symbolizing crown of thorns worn by
Christ while berries represent his blood. Holly
signifies resilience and eternal life

«)

r Py) Reading and Critical Thinking

a) Answer the following

1. Explain as to why does thepoet urge the wind to blow?

2. Comment on the mood of the poet when he says “Heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! unto
the green holly” What is the significance of the Green Holly and how does it relate
to the poem?

3. Give your understanding of why does the poet regard the wind's “tooth ... not so
keen” and explain what does the poem suggest about the harshness of nature
compared to the pain of human relationships?

. Explain the meaning of the word ‘warp’ in the second stanza?
5. Speaker's tragic mood is discussed in poem. Elaborate.
6. Commenton the line “Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:”

b) Choose the correct answer:
i. " Because thou art not seen" To whom the poet addresses in this line?

a) his friend b) west wind c) winter wind d) Easter wind
ii. What according to the poet is most bitter truth of life?

a) "most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly”

b) benefit forgot
c) thy bite is not too nigh
d) thy breath‘is rude
iii. What is unkind than the winter wind?
a) man’s ingratitude b) man’s hatred

c) man’s immaturity d) man’s unkindness

--- PAGE 155 ---
“Oni 13) BLOW, BLOW, THOU WINTER WIND (POEM)
sp Oral Communication

+ Recite the poem loudly to understand its intonation pattern. Note the
expressions of the poet in this poem while reciting it. They indicate the betrayal,
fake friendship and bitter realities of human life.

* Discuss the various interpretations of the poem highlighting its imagery, symbols,
atmosphere and tone within groups.

Figures of Speech: The poem abounds in the usage of figures of speech.A figure of speech is an
expression used to make a greater effect on your reader or listener. It is a form of expression
(such as a simile or metaphor) used to convey meaning or heighten effect often by comparing or
identifying one thing with another that has a meaning or connotation familiar to the reader or
listener.” It also gives a much clearer picture of what you are trying to convey.

Metaphor: A metaphor is a figure of speech that is used to make a comparison, but in a way
different from a simile. Instead, it makes the description of an object look as if it was literally
true. In other words, it can be said that a metaphor is an implied comparison She's the man of
the house! What do you think the above sentence implies? The ‘woman’ is being called the ‘man’
to draw a parallel with the idea of taking all the responsibility and being the bread earner in the
house. This was an example of a common metaphor.

Assonance: Assonance is the repetition of vowel sounds in the same line Assonance is the
repetition of vowel sounds in words that are close together in a sentence or verse. For example,
“His tender heir might bear his memory” (William Shakespeare).

Apostrophe: a mark’ used to indicate the omission of letters or figures, the possessive case (as
in “John's book”), or the plural of letters or figures (as in ‘the 1960's’)” An apostrophe is a device
used to call somebody or something from afar.

- It's a nice day outside. ( contraction)

+ The cat is dirty. Its fur is matted. ( possession)

- You're not supposed to be here. ( contraction)

+ This is your book. ( possession)

+ Who's at the door? ( contraction)

Alliteration: Alliteration is a literary technique derived from Latin, meaning “letters of the
alphabet.” It occurs when two or more words are linked that share the same first consonant
sound, such as “fish fry.” Some famous examples of alliteration sentences include: Peter Piper

LS 155 SE

--- PAGE 156 ---
F unit 13] BLOW, BLOW, THOU WINTER WIND (POEM)

picked a peck of pickled peppers. Alliteration is the repetition of consonant sounds in the same
line in quick succession. The entire poem is rich with alliterations.

* Clary closed her cluttered clothes closet.

* Harry hurried home to watch football on TV.

* Rachel ran right until she realized she was running round and round
Consonance: Consonance is the repetition of consonant sounds in the same line. For
example the sound of /z/ in ‘freeze freeze thou bitter sky’ and sound of /d/ in ‘As
friends remembered not.’

Enjambment: It is a thought in verse contained in one line and does not end at line break
instead it is continued to the next line. For example:

“That dost not bite so nigh

As benefits forgot

Though thou the waters warp,

Thy sting is not so sharp

As friend remembered not.”

Imagery: Imagery is used to make readers perceive things involving their five senses. For
example, “Blow, blow, thou winter wind”, “Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky” and “Thy sting
is not so sharp.” Personification: Personification is to give human qualities to inanimate
objects. For example, “Thy tooth is not so keen”, “Although thy breath be rude” and “Thou
art not so unkind.” Simile: It is a device used to compare an object or a person with
something else to make the meanings clear to the readers. The cold wind is compared to
human beings throughout the poem. For example,

“Thou art not so unkind

As man’s ingratitude.”

“That dost not bite so nigh

As benefits forgot.”

a) Punctuate the given lines.

heigh ho sing heigh ho unto the green holly

most friendship is feigning most loving mere folly

ee ee ee

b)Use the phrasal verbs in given sentences.

look over

--- PAGE 157 ---
unit 13. | BLOW, BLOW, THOU WINTER WIND (POEM)

“
‘

* Summarize the poem “Blow, Blow, Thou Winter Wind” building on the points
discussed in written comprehension.

* Paraphrase the first and second stanza of the poem.
+ Analyze the perspective of the poet as the feelings of an afflicted man.

Teacher's Point
F '* Help the students in understanding the concept of the poem.

|+ Make students to understand the use of figures of speech and their use.

--- PAGE 158 ---
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION

(A DIALOGUE)

analyze how an author's choices concerning. how to structure specific parts of a text
(e.g., the choice of where to begin or end.a story, the choice to provide a comedic or
tragic resolution) contribute to its overall structure and meaning as well as its
aesthetic impact

provide an. objective summary of a range of texts including fiction, non-
fiction,dialogues and other types of text .add new words in glossary

speak confidently and fluently in a wide range of contexts, For example, (conflict
resolution, panel discussion, role-play, dialogue, etc.) to fulfil different purposes
(exposition, argumentation etc.) f

demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written
communication in varying degrees of complexity

comprehend and use contemporary Idioms and proverbs in the different texts and in
their speech

apply the techniques of writing the first draft with sufficient details; erviilieniibe and
editing details to suit the purpose and audience ‘

write a descriptive composition (giving physical description and charagteristics/traits
of a person/object/place moving from general to specific), using correct punctuation
and spelling, by using the process approach - brainstorming, mind mapping, and ,
writing a first draft. have awareness about the selection of profession : ae
Increase their punctuation skills by writing a resume and a cover letter miter
understand some more phrasal verbs and their use in sentences

hone their writing skills by writing dialogue coherently

--- PAGE 159 ---
Se CHOICE OF A PROFESSION

Pre-ReaGing
Think about what you will be when you grow up
- Name any three profession of your choice

Reading

(Ahmed and Ali are two best friends and class fellows. Since their studies will come to an
end soon they are discussing their future plans for career selection. Let's see what they
are talking about)

Ahmed: Assalam -o-Alykum Ali, how are you?

Ali: Wa Alykum salam | am good. What about you?

Ahmed: | am also bearing well , | was just thinking about which profession to choose
for a bright future.

Ali: Well! Not a big deal. | have searched it on internet. There are many sites

which are providing information on career selection.
Ahmed: Can you share some with me?

Ali: . - Whynot, sure. You should know what does a profession mean? A profession is
different from a regular job, because a regular job is mainly a way to earn
money. However, a profession isan occupation requiring long term
commitment which offers financial security, and numerous opportunities to
improve ourselves. Choosing a profession is an unavoidable decision for

_ anyone who wants to pursue his or her tertiary education. Therefore, it is
very important to consider several factors carefully while choosing a

profession. ;
Ahmed: Please tell me about these factors. | don't have any idea.
Ali: . First of all, we should consider mental satisfaction when we are choosing a

profession. If we can get this satisfaction from a profession, we will stay
motivated and enthusiastic throughout. However, if we are not satisfied
with our profession, it will be difficult for us to remain productive. We
should choose the profession according to our interests.

Ahmed: Then what comes next?

Ali: Secondly, we should consider talent when we are choosing a profession. If
we have a natural talent in a field, we will find it more enjoyable and easier
to do well in a profession that is related to our field of interest. However, we

| EEE 159

--- PAGE 160 ---
unit 14] CHOICE OF A PROFESSION

Ahmed:

Ali:

Ahmed:

Ali:

Ahmed:

Ali:

Ahmed:

Ali:

i.
% f:8

Post-reading

What skills are needed to become a successful professional?

Le Aah aay

need more than talent to attain excellence. We need to be hard working as
well. To find out if we are truly talented in a field, we should give ourselves a
complete and honest assessment.

| understand your point of view. Tell me more.

Thirdly, we should consider prospects when we are choosing a profession.
Prospects refer to our chances of promotions and also increments in salary.
It is pointless to remain in a profession that does not allow us to improve
ourselves professionally because we have only one lifetime to use our
potential and become the person that we wish to be. To find out more about
the type of prospects that a profession might offer, we should do ample
research and talk to those who are already employed in our field of interest.

Well you have a lot of information.

Let me continue. Fourthly, salary, location and the number of working hours
per week. These must be prioritized when choosing a profession. These
factors must be balanced with travel requirements and family life.

Oh! Are these points enough?

No, the last point is the skill and commitment, for you the skills set and how
to gain those’through education must be considered when choosing a new
profession. For instance, becoming a doctor requires extensive education
and training. In addition
this professional field
requires an 8-years long
educational commitment

You really have given
me lots of information. |
will follow your advice
Insha'Allah before
choosing a profession.
Thank you.

My pleasure, dear
friend.

--- PAGE 161 ---
F unit 14 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION
— a a o  |

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give
synonyms of each in the given column. The first one is done for you. Also use these words
in your own sentences.

words Meanings Synonyms
security safety protection
numerous many in number, several

opportunities chances

tertiary third in order or level,

motivated inspired ,stimulated

enthusiastic eager, passionate

potential latent qualities, abilities

extensive huge

commitment dedication, devotion

gain achieve “@ CO.

Reading and Critical Thinking

a) Answer the following

. Atwhat age students decide to choose a profession?

. Elaborate on the factors which must be discussed before selecting a profession.
. Explain what is meant by natural talent.

. Weshould consider certain factors before choosing a profession. Discuss.

. Skills and commitment play an important role in selection of a profession. How?

. What is your choice of profession? Discuss it in detail while focusing on your
motives in the selection of a career.

ou hk WY =

b) Choose the correct answer:
i. What was Ahmed thinking about?
a) profession to choose b) hobby to have
C) friends’ party d) going out with friends

161

ay

--- PAGE 162 ---
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION

ii. What is the first factor to consider while choosing a profession?

a) mental capability b) mental thinking

c) mental satisfaction d) mental caliber
iii. What is meant by prospects?

a) chances b) salary

c) increases d) pay cheque

Oral Communication

Activity
1. Intonation pattern

Read aloud the following sentences to your partner laying stress on the syllables
/words that are in capital letters.

a. It was SO dark that we couldn't SEE our hands in front of our faces.
b. Do you visit your sick grandparents REGULARLY every WEEK?
c. I'msosorry, but | just CAN'T go out with you NOW.

2. Exchange stories with your partner about a situation that caused you stress.
Note the rise and fall of tone and pitch you speak how you felt, what was your
physical condition, and what you did.

Vocabulary and Grammar »

Participle: In the lesson choosing a profession the word ‘choosing’ has a combined
characteristics of verb and adjective. Such words which are formed:by adding ‘ing’ to
the first form of the verb are called Participles. The word participle comes from
classical Latin participium, from particeps ‘sharing, participation’, because it shares
certain properties of verbs, adjectives, and adverbs. Present participles can be used as
adjectives, as part of participial phrases, and to form continuous verb tenses. For
example:-

Base Verb: Sneeze

Present Participle: Sneezing

Types of participle

1) Present participle: The present participle is often used when we want to express an
active action. In English we add -ing to the infinitive of the verb.

Use of the present participle

eT ee a ae it a ea gk a

--- PAGE 163 ---
Progressive/ He is reading a book.
Continuous tense
He was reading a book.
Reading books is fun.
He likes reading books.
Look at the reading boy.
He came reading around the corner.
He sat reading in the corner.
| saw him reading.

2 - Past participle. The form of a verb, typically ending in ‘ed’ in English, which is

used in forming perfect and passive tenses and sometimes as an adjective, e. g. ,
looked in have you looked? Lost in lost property.

Use of the past participle
Perfect tenses He has forgotten the pencil.
He had forgotten the pencil.
Passive voice A house is built.
A house was built.

Participle Look at the washed car.
The car washed yesterday is blue.
He had his car washed.

a- Complete the story with the correct form of the verbs in the box.

breathe burn follow move run watch

One evening | was walking home and | started to feel very nervous. | was walking down a
very dark street and | could feel! wasn't alone. |couldfeelsomeone_
me and | was sure | could hear their footsteps. |_.._=—_fastly. | stopped and
listened carefully. Yes! There it was. | could hear someone loudly and smell
their cigarette | turned round quickly and saw something out of

163

--- PAGE 164 ---
unit 14 | CHOICE OF A PROFESSION

the corner of my eye. Then ... BANG! The last thing | remember is that | heard the sound of

feet ____—_——_—s away, and then! woke up and found myself lying in this hospital bed.
b- Complete the following sentences with an appropriate participle.

» His__—s Coat needs mending. (tattered, tattering)

- A_______sstone gathers no moss. (rolling, rolled)

* A______sopportunity never returns. (losing, lost)

* He kept me (waiting, waited)

« She looked. Ss (worried, worrying)

* Being Ss With worrk, | couldn't meet them. (occupied, occupying)

c-Punctuate the given lines.

oh not a big deal i have searched it on internet there are many sites which are
providing information on career selection

d-Give the antonyms of the following.

fine —Cséiregulars SC sme,
several... ____ satisfied oo -—« __ honest
e-Use the phrasal verbs in sentences.

pass out

pass up

--- PAGE 165 ---
F cunit 14 | CHOICE OF A PROFESSION

Verb Tense Consistency.

Verb tense consistency refers to keeping the same tense throughout a clause. If you
| have two or more time periods, start a new clause or a new sentence. Let's consider an
_ example:-_

Ali finished his essay, tidied his room, and went out for supper.

Finished and went are in past tense, but tidies is in present tense. Logistically, this
can't happen. We could fix this in a couple of different ways:

Ali finished his essay, tidied his room, and went out for supper.
Ali finished his essay and went out for supper, and now he is tidying his room.

I'm eating the cake which | made this morning.

The verb tense consistency in this sentence is logical, as the cake must be made before
it can be eaten. Still, we use two clauses toshow the different tenses.

In the dialogue above consistent verb tenses are used which clearly establish the time of
the actions being described. It is vital to use the same tense throughout a writing unless it
is necessary to show an event that occurred at a different time. Do not shift tenses
unnecessarily.

--- PAGE 166 ---
unit 4 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION
SaIS a MESES

Activity: ‘
(in the following passage from Alex Haley's Roots, some of the verbs have been rooted

from rewords in bracket. Supply the appropriate tense for each missing verb, the plain
form of which is given in brackets.

In Banjuh, the capital of Gambia, | met with a group of Gambians. They [tell] me how for
centuries the history of Africa has been preserved. In the older villages of the back
country, there are old men called griots, who [be] in fact living archives. Such men
[memorize] and, on special occasions, [recite] the cumulative histories of clans or
families or villages as those histories [have] long been told. Since my forefather [have]
said his name was Kin-tay (properly spelled Kinte), and since the Kinte clan [be] known in
Gambia, the group of Gambians would see what they could do to help me. | was back in
New York when a registered letter [arrive] from Gambia. ~

Words [have] been passed in the back country, and a griot of the Kinte clan [have],
indeed, been found. His ‘name, the letter said, [be] Kebba Kanga Fofana. | [return] to
Gambia and [organize] a safari tolocate him.

--- PAGE 167 ---
f unit14 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION

b) Summarize the salient points of this unit in the form of mind map.

_

Steps in
career
selection

Ne 7

A resume is a formal document that all job applicants create to let their prospective
employers know their educational background, qualification, expertise and how suitable
they are for any job position. A resume is usually accompanied by a customized cover
letter in which the applicant expresses an interest in a specific job or company and draws
attention to the most relevant specifics on the resume.

RE 167 § ees Rd.

--- PAGE 168 ---
nica

OBJECTIVE Driven high school student with a 3.84.0 GPA and excellent organizational and
interpersonal skills. Seeking to apply my tutoring and mentorship skills to the Youth
Development summer internship at [Company]. Possess proven communication skills and
passion for advocacy that will support your organization's cause.

EDUCATION West Ashley High Schoo! Relevant Coursework
Chicago, IL Calculus
Clas: af 2025 AP English
3.8 GPA, made Honor Roll Fall of 2022 & Extracurriculars
Spring of 2023 Mau Alpha Theta: Math Honor Society
National Merit Scholarship Finalist Poetry Club
PROFESSIONAL Virtual Math Tetor Sep 2022 — Present
EXPERIENCE EnCorps, Inc - Chicago, IL

© Work with 3 stadents each semester to increase math comprehension through online
study and tutoring sessions each lasting 2 hours

® Improved students” test scores by an average of 18% over the course of the
semester

® Actively seek varied teaching methods to effectively cater to different learning
styles, meeting each stadent where they are

Volunteer Jun 2021 — Aug 2022
The Academy Project - Chicago, IL

© Volunteer twice weekly in reading remediation and mentoring programs, having
worked with 15 foster children

© Assist children im reading and development of literacy skills, fostering a love of
learning

*® Provide support to children, serving as asource of stability in their daily
lives

KEY *® Mathematics

SKILLS ® Spanish and English
© Web and tech savvy, require little to no training
* Adaptability
© Self-motivation

Ll LT 168

--- PAGE 169 ---
Sample Resume (Name)

Your street address Your City,
OBJECTIVE
Seeking a position as a Sales Associate in Multinational Company.
EXPERIENCE

* Three years working experience in Gold Star Insurance Company, Blue Area,
Islamabad. as CSR (July 2005 to July 2008).

* Five years working experience in Punjab Insurance Group as Assistant Area
Manager (August 2008 to August 2013)

EDUCATION
« Masters in Business Administration (University of the Punjab, 2005. )
+ Graduation in Business Administration (University of The Punjab, Lahore, 2003.)
« |. Com (Federal Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education, Islamabad in 2001).

* Matriculation Federal Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education, Islamabad
in 1999

SKILLS
* Good telephonic and communication skill.
+ Keyboard typing at 45 wpm and 10-key skill.
* Basic knowledge of Windows, Word, Excel, Power Point and Internet.
* Three years of working in a Spanish company.
« Dependable, hardworking and trustworthy.
« Responsible, punctual and task oriented.
* Work well as a team player and independently.
* Great leadership skills.
REFERENCES
References available upon request.

— _—

fr he 169

--- PAGE 170 ---
F unit 14] CHOICE OF A PROFESSION

Cover Letter for Job Application

Cover letter /Job Application Letter Sample

123 Main Street,
New Town, Lahore.
12345 (+92 42 9234678) |

Contact Name

Title

Company Name

Company street Address
City, Zip Code

Dear Mr. / Ms. Contact,

| have effectively companied my (educational background) and skills in the areas
of (marketing and operations) to successfully (meet all balanced scorecard targets) and
(generate sales in excess of 5 million). have been asked to take on increasingly more
responsibility at company xyz.

| am bringing to your attention my skills, accomplishments, and (talent for
selling in a competitive market place). So that we can discuss joining xyz company as a
(senior member of your district sales) team.

Significantly upgraded work force planning process. of large company’s call
center operation resulting in a 15% increase in service level in just one year's time.

| look forward to meeting with you to discuss how | can add value to your
company’s bottom-line results.

Sincerely,

Name.

» Now you have read the samples given above. Select an advertisement from a
newspaper, paste it in your notebook. Then write your resume and a covering
letter.

+ Follow the instructions and demands given in the advertisement and develop a
resume.

--- PAGE 171 ---
x, CHOICE OF A PROFESSION
a Ae a ne Chad RTE SSPE | SS OE REISS a

\\)

Account Manager

Qualifications: Send Your CV and Cover
Letter To Email:
¢ Male / Female
* Bachelor degree in business,
marketing or communication
* Can work individual and team
e Has 1 year experience in
according field

+ Write a dialogue between father and son regarding the challeges faced in
finding a suitable job in Pakistan.

Teacher's Point

* Discuss with students about the choice of a right profession and its benefits. it will be a counseling for
their future.

* Ask them to perform role play of the dialogue.

--- PAGE 172 ---
After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

speak confidently and fluently in a wide range of contexts, For example, (conflict resolution, panel discussion,
role-play, dialogue, etc.) to fulfil different purposes (exposition, argumentation etc. )

engage effectively in a range of collaborative discussions{one-on-one, in groups, and teacher-led) with diverse
partners on grade-level topics, texts, and issues

read with accurate pronunciation, appropriate pitch and voice variation suitable for fictional and nonfictional
texts

ask and answer higher-order questions to guide/ assess reading

evaluate how authors use language, including figurative language, considering the impact on the reader.

use pre-reading and while-reading strategies to analyse and explore different layers of meaning within texts
including biases and opinions.

choose words and phrases for effect (mood of the story).

comment on implied meaning, e.g. writer's viewpoint, relationships between characters etc.

evaluate the particular elements of a story or drama.(e.g., how the setting shapes the characters or plot).
Evaluate stages of plot development in a fictional text. (exposition, setting, climax, character development,
resolution)

evaluate different points of view (e.g., first-person, third-person narrative) Examine an author's point of view
or purpose in a text

read, view and analyse a variety of reading grade-appropriate and high-interest books and texts from print and
non-print sources: c. Narratives (e.g., fables, historical fiction, science fiction, legends)

cite strong and thorough textual evidence to support analysis of what the text says explicitly as well as
inferences drawn from the text

identify and correctly use patterns of word changes that indicate different meanings or parts of speech (e.g.,
different types of gerund)

demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech (gerunds) in oral and written communication in
varying degrees of complexity

produce legible work that shows the correct spelling of the conventions of punctuation and capitalization
produce clear and coherent writing in which the development, organization, and style are appropriate to the
task, purpose, and audience

write narratives to develop real or imagined experiences or events using effective techniques, well-chosen
details, and well-structured event sequences

engage and orient the reader by setting out a problem, situation, or observation and its significance,
establishing one or multiple point(s) of view, and introducing a narrator and/or characters; create a smooth
progression of experiences or events

use a variety of techniques to sequence events so that they build on one another to create a coherent whole
and build toward a particular tone and outcome (e.g., a sense of mystery, suspense, growth, or resolution).

--- PAGE 173 ---
P unit 15 | The Ninny (Short Story), Anton Chekhov

Pre-Reading
* Recall the theme of any short story you have read earlier.
+ Search any two famous short story writers.

Reading

Just a few days ago | invited Yulia Vasilyevna, the governess of my children, to come to my
study. | wanted to settle my account with her.

"Sit down, Yulia Vasilyevna, “| said to her. "Let's get our accounts settled. I'm sure
you need some money, but you keep standing on ceremony and never ask for it. Let me
see. We agreed to give you thirty rubles’ a month, didn't we?"

“Forty. "
"No, thirty. | made a note of it. | always pay
the governess thirty. Now, let me see. You have been

with us for two months?" Ask the students to locate the

“Two months and five days..” specific information such as names,
dates, times, and numbers
“Two months exactly. | made a note of it. So, | mentioned in the story.

you have sixty rubles coming to you. Subtract nine
Sundays. You know you don't tutor Kolya on Sundays; you just go out for a walk. And then
the three holidays..."

While-reading

Yulia Vasilyevna blushed and picked at the trimmings of her dress but said not a
word.

"Three holidays. So, we take off twelve rubles. Kolya was sick for four days—those
days you didn't look after him. You looked after Vanya, only Vanya. Then there were the
three days you had toothache, when my wife gave you permission to stay away from the
children after dinner. Twelve and seven makes nineteen. Subtract... . That leaves... hm
. . . forty-one rubles. Correct?"

Yulia Vasilvena’s left eye reddened and filled with tears. Her chin trembled. She
began to cough nervously, blew her nose, and said nothing.

"Then around New Year's Day you broke a cup and saucer. Subtract two rubles. The
cup cost more than that—it was an heirloom, but we won't bother about that. We're the
ones who pay. Another matter. Due to your
carelessness Kolya climbed a tree and tore his coat.
Subtract ten. Also, due to your carelessness the
chambermaid ran off with Vanya's boots. You ought
to have kept your eyes open. You get a good salary.

While-reading

Skim the text for finding main idea
of the text.

a

--- PAGE 174 ---
F unit 15. | The Ninny (Short Story), Anton Chekhov
Sele. Re Hk eRe ey we Oe Ore er ie ah eer abo =e Bae earueraal 5 oF

So we dock off five more. . . . On the tenth of January you took ten rubles from me. "

“| didn't, “ Yulia Vasilyevna whispered.

“But | made a note of it. "

"Well, yes—perhaps..."

“From forty-one we take twenty-seven. That leaves fourteen. "

Her eyes filled with tears, and her thin, pretty little nose was shining with
perspiration. Poor little child!

"| only.took money once, " she said in a trembling voice. “| took three rubles from
your wife. . . neveranything more. "

"Did you now? You see, | never made a note of it. Take three from fourteen. That
leaves eleven. Here’s.your money, my dear. Three, three, three . . . one and one. Take it,
my dear. "

| gave hér the eleven rubles. With trembling fingers she took them and slipped
them into her pocket.

“Merci,” she whispered.

| jumped up and began pacing up.and down the room. | was in a furious temper.
"Why did you say merci”?/ asked. “For the money..”

“Don't you realize I've been cheating you? | steal your money, and all you can say is
merci”!

“In my other places they gave me nothing. ”

"They gave you nothing! Well, no wonder! | was playing trick on you—a dirty trick.
. . I'll give you your eighty rubles, they are all here in an envelope made out for you. Is it
possible for anyone to be such a nitwit? Why didn’t you protest? Why did you keep your
mouth shut? Is it possible that there is anyone in this world who is so Spineless? Why are
you such a ninny?”

She gave me a bitter little smile. On her face | read the words: “Yes, it is possible. “

| apologized for having played this cruel trick on her, and to her great surprise
gave her the eighty rubles. And then she said “merci again several times, always
timidly, and went out. | gazed after her, thinking how easy it is in this world to be
strong.

* Who apologized for having played a trick?

Pr TTISEL RS 174 SR RN are eee

<a
ea see. eee ve SS eS ee ee oN ed WS

--- PAGE 175 ---
F unit 15 | The Ninny (Short Story), Anton Chekhov

Anton Pavlovich Chekhov (1860-1904), a twentieth-century master storyteller and
_ playwright, was born in southern Russia. He studied medicine in Moscow, supporting his
family by writing comic stories. After Chekhov published his first book in 1886, he
concentrated on writing. He also wrote plays, among them the classics The Three |
Sisters and The Cherry Orchard. That Chekhov sought to “paint life in its true aspects,
and to show how far this life falls short of the ideal life" can be seen in "The Ninny. "
Theme is the central idea of a story, or the general idea about life that is revealed
| through a story. Sometimes the theme of a story is stated directly. Sometimes you must
| draw a conclusion about it—by considering all of the story's elements. In "The Ninny" the
theme is stated directly in the conclusion that the employer draws about certain
people.

©

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give
synonyms of each in the given column. The first.one is done for you. Also use these words
in your own sentences.

* words Meanings
rubles units of money used in Russia, tonto
Union.
merci for “Thank you”
perspiration sweat ; p>
nitwit stupid or silly person
-ninny © a foolish and weak person ee
governess nanny
apologized confess :
-timidly delicately, slightly = Rae ae def
gazed glare, see

--- PAGE 176 ---
The Ninny (Short Story), Anton Chekhov
inn a . |. . 2. aaa

Reading and Critical Thinking

a) Answer the following questions:
1. According to the governess, how much should she be paid per month?

PP eS }

Name three reasons why the employer subtracts money from the governess's
salary.

How does the governess behave as the employer goes over their accounts?
How much money does the employer pay the governess in reality?
Why does the employer trick the governess?

In this story, the governess whispers or speaks hesitantly "in a trembling
voice"—or says nothing at all. Based on this, what do you infer about her
character?

. What can you infer about the employer from his “furious” speech at the end of the

story?

. Choose the best definition for the following italicized words, based on context:

Mr. Breen stormed and shouted, his face red, his hair flying, his manner berserk.

a. surprised b. hurt c. frenzied
Cheryl, smiling and nodding pleasantly, acquiesced to any plan, rather than refuse.
a. rejected b. agreed to c. Opposed

b. Choose the best answer:
i. The writer invited Yulia Vasilyevna, the governess of his children, to come to his

study to

a) arrange an event for them. b) settle the account
c) prepare food for them

ii. The governess had three days holiday, so, the writer took off

a) ten rubles. b) eleven rubles. c) twelve rubles.

iii. The employer tricked the governess because he wanted to help the governess

a) earn money b) stand up for herself. __c) randomly

176

--- PAGE 177 ---
F unit 15] The Ninny (Short Story), Anton Chekhov
Se oe ee a

Oral Communication

Atmosphere or Mood of AStory

Atmosphere is the emotional tone of a literary work. It determines an emotional
mood to the readers, whether happy or (more commonly) terrifying or disastrous. For
example, Shakespeare establishes the tense and fearful atmosphere at the beginning
of the play Hamlet by the terse and nervous dialogue of the sentinels as they
anticipate a reappearance of the ghost. Coleridge engenders a compound of religious
and superstitious terror by his description of the initial scene in the narrative poem
Christabel (1816). Alternative terms frequently used for atmosphere are mood and
ambience.

The mood is the feeling that the writer tries to evoke in the readers e.g., anxiety,
calmness, anger or joy. It's maintained through settings, tone, word choice, theme, or
subject matter in a story. Setting refers to the physical location in a narrative. Tone
determines the attitude of the narrator. Words with negative or positive connotations
evoke particular feelings, and subject matter or theme also creates sad or happy
mood respectively.

Most often, the words which are used to describe emotion can be used to describe the
mood of a story. Gloomy, humorous, reflective, idyllic, melancholy, ominous,
mysterious, calm, lonely, exciting and fearful are some common words used to
describe mood in a piece of Literature.

Discuss the mood of the story in group by stgting setting, tone, word choice and theme
of the story. Afterwards, each group leader must share his/her the views of the group
. with the rest of the class.

Vocabulary and Grammar

Gerund: A gerund is the -ing form of a verb that functions the same as a noun. For
example, “Running is fun. ” In this sentence, “running” is the gerund. It acts just like a
noun.

--- PAGE 178 ---
F unit 15 . The Ninny (Short Story), Anton Chekhov

Types of gerunds
The four types of gerunds and gerund phrases are as following:

1. Gerund as a Subject

-| Gardening is my favorite hobby. (Gardening is normally a verb, but here it is the name
of an activity.
Gardening in the summertime is a challenge because of the heat. (The gerund is
followed by a modifying adverbial phrase, forming a gerund phrase. )
2. Gerund as a Direct Object
My neighbors admire my gardening. (The admiration is not for the action of gardening,
but for the results of the action.)

lam enjoying my gardening this year. (The direct object of the subject is “my gardening

this year.”)

3. Gerund as an Object of Preposition

| have received several awards for my gardening. (The awards have been given for the
results of the activity. )

Some people consider my interest.in gardening an obsession. (The gerund phrase is
“gardening an obsession.”)

4. Gerund as Subject Complement

My favorite hobby is gardening. (Again, gardening is described as something done, not

the act of doing it. The statement is the inverse of the first sentence in this group; here
“My favorite hobby” is the subject, and gardening is its complement.)

| do my gardening in the morning. (The phrase “gardening in the morning” is the subject
complement.)

b) Make sentences of the gerunds Swimming and Flying as Subjects, Direct
Objects, Objects of Preposition and Subject Complements.

natich 44 Eadaent ICD C149 C14.m Mm... EE ~— mm An

--- PAGE 179 ---
. The Ninny (Short Story), Anton Chekhov

c) Punctuate the given lines.
did you now you see never made a note of it take three from fourteen that leaves
eleven here's your money my dear three three three one and one take it my dear

d) Give antonyms of the following.
a never
shut_ ss ___Little strong
e) Use the given phrasal verbs in sentences:
put down
put off.

put out
put together
put on

run into

* Do you agree with the theme of the story? Give reasons for your answers.
« State the theme in your own words.
* Fill the given mind map according to the story's mode.

SETTINGS AND

ATMOSPHERE

Activity

Create another story on the theme of ' Dignity of Labour’ keeping in your mind the
mood you want to highlight in your story.

References:

Abrams, M. H. (1999). A glossary of literary terms (9" ed.). Earl McPeek.

https: //www.masterclass.com/articles/how-to-create-atmosphere-and-mood-in-writing
https: // www. litcharts.com/literary-devices-and-terms/mood

Teacher's Point .
* Ask students to bring short narratives from the Islamic History regarding the dignity of labor.

--——

--- PAGE 180 ---
UNIT 16°

a

e
1]

aga (Ove-tce Py

a * Alice Gerstenberg

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

* speak confidently and fluently in a wide range of contexts, For example, (conflict resolution, panel discussion,
role-play, dialogue, etc.) to fulfil different purposes (exposition, argumentation etc.).

* engage effectively in a range of collaborative discussions (one-on-one, in groups, and teacher-led) with diverse
partners on grade-level topics, texts, and issues

* read with accurate pronunciation, appropriate pitch and voice variation suitable for fictional and nonfictional a&
texts

+ askand answer higher-order questions to guide/assess reading

* evaluate how authors use language, including figurative language, considering the impact on the reader.

* use pre-reading and while-reading strategies to analyse and explore different layers of meaning within texts
including biases and opinions

* comment on implied meaning, e.g. writer's viewpoint, relationships between characters etc.

* evaluate stages of plot development in a fictional text. (exposition, setting, climax, character development,
resolution)

* read, view and analyse a variety of reading grade-appropriate and high-interest books and texts from print and
non-print sources: c. Narratives (e.g., fables, historical fiction, science fiction, legends)

* cite strong and thorough textual evidence to support analysis of what the text says explicitly as well as
inferences drawn from the text

+ identify and correctly use patterns of word changes that indicate different meanings or parts of speech (e.g.,
verb and modifiers)

+ demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written communication in varying
degrees of complexity

* apply knowledge of parts of speech, tenses, sentence structure and other features of grammar and vocabulary
to understand how language functions in different contexts, make effective choices for meaning or style while
reading, listening and writing

* produce legible.work that shows the correct spelling of the conventions of punctuation and capitalization

* produce clear and coherent writing in which the development, organization, and style are appropriate to the
task, purpose, and audience

--- PAGE 181 ---
F unit 16 | FOURTEEN (One-Act Play), Alice Gerstenberg

Pre-Reading
What is a One-Act Play?
Have you ever read any One-Act Play?

Reading

CHARACTERS

MRS. HORACE PRINGLE: Awoman of fashion.
ELAINE: Her debutante daughter.

DUNHAM: The butler or maid.

SCENE:

The dining-room of a New York residence. A long table running from left to right, witha
chair at each end and six chairs on each side, is set elaborately for fourteen. DUNHAM,
the butler, is hovering over the table to give it a few finishing touches as MRS. PRINGLE
comes in. She is a woman of fashion, handsome, and wears a very lovely evening gown.
She is rather excitable in temperament but withal capable and executive, vivacious and
humorously charming. She enters in haste carryinga.corsage bouquet of flowers and the
empty box of paper from which she has unwrapped them. ]

MRS. PRINGLE: Dunham, I've just had word from Mr. Harper that he was called away to
the bedside of a friend who is very ill. He sent me these flowers=- it's a good thing he did. |
don't approve of young men refusing dinner invitations at the very last minute.

DUNHAM: [Relieving her.] I'll take the box and paper, Mrs. Pringle.

MRS. PRINGLE: [Looking at the table anxiously and then at her watch.] It’s too bad -- after
you've set it all so beautifully -- and it's getting so late -- someone might be coming any
moment. How's cook?

DUNHAM: Cook's in a temper, as always, madam.

MRS. PRINGLE: I'm glad to hear it. She's like an actress -- the better the temper, the better
the performance. As long as she serves us a good dinner, | don't care how much she swears.

The rest of you can just keep out of her way. Where's Gustave?

DUNHAM: I'm sorry to have to say it, madam, but there's such an awful blizzard out he's

sweeping off the sidewalk.

MRS. PRINGLE: Oh! Dear me, yes! | should have ordered an awning! But who expected a

storm like this?

--- PAGE 182 ---
FOURTEEN (One-Act Play), Alice Gerstenbe

[She glances out of the window. ELAINE, a young debutante in evening gown comes
running in with a bunch of place-cards. ]

ELAINE: Here are the place-cards, mother, and the diagram. Shall | put them around?
MRS. PRINGLE: Yes, dear. Elaine, I'm going up to look after your father. He's so helpless
about his ties. [She starts to leave the room.] Remove one plate, Dunham.

DUNHAM: Remove one plate, madam? Oh! Madam! It is a certainty! You wouldn't sit down
with thirteen.

MRS. PRINGLE: [Drawing back.] Thirteen! Why, you're right--thirteen! We can never sit
down with thirteen. That's all due to Mr. Harper's negligence. Sick friend, nothing! He's
just one of those careless men who never answer their invitations in time. His flowers,
indeed, to make me forgive him -- now look at the trouble he's put me to -- thirteen! |
wonder whom | could get to come in the last minute.
Quick -- Elaine -- help me think.

[She rushes to the telephone and looks madly
through her list of acquaintances. ] :

ELAINE: There's always Uncle George.

MRS. PRINGLE: He never opens his head!

DUNHAM: Mr. Morgan, madam, he.always tells a
joke or two.

MRS. PRINGLE: Why, yes, Dunham -- that’s clever of
you! Hello Central -- Lakeview 5971 -- at oncé, please -- Elaine dear, your hair's much too
tight -- pull it out -- pull it out -- come here. [In telephone.] Mr. Morgan's Well, this is Mrs.
Pringle speaking -- from across the street. Yes. When Mr.Morgan comes in, please tell him
to call me up right away. | want him to dine with us -- in about ten minutes -- you expect
him? [She pull’s ELAIN'S hair out to make it look fluffier. ELAINE makes faces of pain, but
her mother pays no attention.] Have him call me right away. [She hands up the receiver. ]
Now if he shouldn't get it -- then what'll | do?

ELAINE: Well, mother, | don't have to be at the table. It's your party, anyway. Everybody's
married and older than! am.

MRS. PRINGLE: [Pointing to the table diagram in ELAIN’S hand.] Didn't | put you next to
Oliver Farnsworth? Millions! He's worth millions!

While-reading

_Circle any four unfamiliar words or
‘expressions. Before you reach for
their dictionaries, have a closer
look at the words preceding and
following the unknown terms.
Using context clues, see if they can
figure out their meaning.

ELAINE: Well, he won't be giving me any.

MRS. PRINGLE: Can't he marry you? Aren't you going to try to make a good match for
yourself? | fling every eligible man | can at your head. Can't you finish the rest yourself?
ELAINE: It’s no use, mother, you're trying to marry me off to anyone as important as he is.
He frightens me to death. | lose my tongue. I'm as afraid of him as I'd be afraid of the
Prince of Wales!

--- PAGE 183 ---
F unit 16 | FOURTEEN (One-Act Play), Alice Gerstenberg

MRS. PRINGLE: The Prince of Wales! Oh! What wouldn't | give to have the Prince of Wales
in my house! New York has lost its heart to him. | was just telling Mr. Farnsworth yesterday
that I'd give anything to have the Prince here. | would establish my social position for life!
And I've such a reputation for being a wonderful hostess. [The telephone rings.] Dear me!
-- the phone -- Hello -- Mrs. Sedgwick -- Yes -- this is Mrs. Pringle -- What? No -- Oh! Caught
in a snow drift -- can't get another car? [She puts her hand over the telephone and speaks
delightedly to ELAINE.] Good! The widow can't come -- that leaves us twelve -- remove
two plates, Dunham. [DUNHAM removes two plates. and ELAINE changes the table-cards.
MRS. PRINGLE continues into the telephone.] Oh! That's a shame! I'm heartbroken. Oh!
My dear, how-can we get along without you! But have you really tried? Oh, I'm reduced to
tears. Good-bye, dear. [She hangs up the receiver, and takes it down again. ] Well, I'm glad
she dropped out -- Central -- give me Lakeview 5971 -- Dunham, with two less, you can
save two cocktails and at least four glasses of champagne. [Into the telephone.] Has Mr.
Morgan come in yet? Well, don't give him the message | telephoned before about crossing
the street to Mrs. Pringle's for dinner. It's too late -- you understand? [She hangs up the
receiver.] Well, anyway, I've invited Clem, returned |
my indebtedness and saved my champagne besides—

DUNHAM: The liquor is getting low, madam -- what
with prohibition and entertaining so much--

ELAINE: [In dismay.] But, mother, if you only have
twelve people, Father can't sit at the head of the
table.

MRS. PRINGLE: But he has to sit at the head. It looks
too undignified when the man of the house is pushed to the side--

ELAINE: There's no other way. There must be a woman at each end--

MRS. PRINGLE: [Distraught.] How absurd! | always forget. Of course, twelve is an
impossible number -- [She goes around the table looking at the place cards.] | don't want
to put any of these women at the head -- there's Mrs. Darby -- such a cat -- | wouldn't give
her the honor and Mrs. -- [The telephone rings. ] Answer it, Dunham.

DUNHAM: Hello -- Mrs. Pringle’s residence -- a message? Yes, sir -- What, sir? -- Mr. Darby --
the doctor says your baby has the chicken-pox--

MRS. PRINGLE: Chicken-pox! Elaine!

ELAINE: Mother!

DUNHAM: Yes, sir. [He hangs up the receiver. ] Mr. Darby sends his apologies -- but owing to
the transmutability of the disease, Mr. and Mrs. Darby feel obliged to regret and also their
house-guests, Mr. and Mrs. Fleetwood--

MRS. PRINGLE: That's four out.

While-reading

a

After students have read a
paragraph, make them pause and
ask what they think is going to

happen next. Make predictions.

“Se 183 eee

--- PAGE 184 ---
Unit 16

ELAINE: Then youre only eight! Quick, the plates, Dunham--

[She begins to remove chairs and gathers up silver and plates feverishly. MRS. PRINGLE
getting more and more distraught, helps. With so much unaccustomed help, DUNHAM
gets confused and goes through many unnecessary motions; removes plates, breaks
them, drops silver, aimlessly trying to hurry, his fingers all thumbs. ]

MRS. PRINGLE: Don't we know someone to invite the last minute--

ELAINE: The Hatwoods--

MRS. PRINGLE: They don't serve drinks when they entertain -- | can't afford to invite them
to drink mine--

ELAINE: The Greens--

MRS. PRINGLE: She's not interesting enough.

ELAINE: Mr. Conley--

MRS. PRINGLE: He never makes a dinner call, even after all the times | have invited him.
ELAINE: Hester Longley--

MRS. PRINGLE: Not at the same table with you and Oliver Farnsworth. She's far too pretty,
too clever--

ELAINE: Where's our book? [She runs her finger down the address book.] The Tuppers?
MRS. PRINGLE: The Tuppers! Good Heavens, Elaine, six in the family.

ELAINE: That would get us back to fourteen; then father could sit at the head of the
table.

MRS. PRINGLE: Well, try them. I'll rush and tell your father to hold up the drawing room--
[Exit left.]

ELAINE: [on the telephone.] Ridgeway 9325 -- This is Elaine Pringle -- What Tupper am |
speaking to? Oh, Ella, hello! -- | hope you haven't finished your dinner -- We had a party
arranged here and the last moment everybody's been dropping out -- the blizzard -- Can't
you flock your family around the corner and eat with us? Mother and | thought we knew
you well enough to call you like this at the seventh hour. You would? Oh! fine! [To
DUNHAM. ] Six more plates, Dunham. [In the telephone.] What? -- Oh -- well -- but -- [She
hesitates, stutters, looks distressed, muffles the telephone.] Dunham, get Mother quick.
[In the telephone as DUNHAM hurries out of the room.] Yes -- yes -- of course [not
enthusiastically], love it -- why certainly -- yes, my dear -- all right. [She hangs up the
receiver and puts her hand to her head with an ejaculation of dismay.] Great Caesar, now
what have | done?

MRS. PRINGLE: [Rushes in followed by DUNHAM. ] What's the matter -- Elaine -- what is--

ELAINE: ifaw I've done it! I've just done it -- but | couldn't get out of it -- | just couldn't --

--- PAGE 185 ---
F unit 16 | FOURTEEN (One-Act Play), Alice Gerstenberg

you weren't here -- | always lose my head and bungle things--

MRS. PRINGLE: But what -- don't keep us waiting like this -- what is it?

ELAINE: | invited Ella and the family and she accepted and then she said they had two
house-guests -- and would it be all right and of course | said it would and now were --
sixteen!

DUNHAM: [In dismay. ] Sixteen! But, madam, the table's not that long!

MRS. PRINGLE: Elaine! That's just like you -- no tact -- no worldly wisdom -- if I'd been at
the phone I'd have politely said that my table--

ELAINE: But you weren't at the phone -- you ought to attend to such messages yourself --
you know | always lose my head --

DUNHAM: But the dishes, madam -- and we only have fourteen squabs--

ELAINE: | won't eat any--

MRS. PRINGLE: But | must not be disgraced -- we'll have to make the best of it -- and insert
another board -- [DUNHAM goes out. MRS. PRINGLE and ELAINE hurriedly remove part of
the cloth.]

ELAINE: But mother, | needn't sit at the table,

MRS. PRINGLE: [Pointing to the chair authoritatively.] You're going to sit right next to
Oliver Farnsworth! Now | don't wish to hear another word about it.

ELAINE: But can't we squeeze them in without all the work of adding another board? If |
move the plates and chairs closer--

MRS. PRINGLE: Have you forgotten that Mr. Tupper weighs something like two hundred
and fifty pounds? And Mrs. Conley has no waist line? It can't be done! --

DUNHAM: [Entering with table board.] Cook is in a rage, madam=- she says she has only
prepared for fourteen.

MRS. PRINGLE: | can't help it -- she'll have to prepare for sixteen. Tell her to open cans of
soup and vegetables and--

DUNHAM: But the ice-cream forms and the gelatine molds--

ELAINE: I'll pretend I don't like them.

MRS. PRINGLE: And I'll pretend I'm on a diet--

ELAINE: But | really wouldn't have to be at the table.

MRS. PRINGLE: Be still! [She starts as the telephone rings.] The telephone! [Her hand to
her head.] Now what? Don't answer it! It's driving me mad-- [She goes herself as ELAINE
and DUNHAM do not go.] Hello -- yes -- This is Mrs. Pringle -- Oh! yes -- Jessica! -- What! --
the blizzard -- your cold -- too dangerous! [She waves to DUNHAM not to put the board in
the table. DUNHAM, ELAINE and MRS. PRINGLE are delighted and relieved but MRS.

E. 185

--- PAGE 186 ---
T unit 16° | FOURTEEN (One-Act Play), Alice Gerstenberg

PRINGLE pretends otherwise over the telephone. ] Oh! Jessica -- you poor dear --yes, your
husband's right, it would be foolhardy -- put on a mustard plaster -- hot toddy -- go to bed -
- so sorry! [She hangs up the receiver.] There -- that's wonderful -- now we are just
fourteen--

ELAINE: But the cards are all wrong. Only six are coming who were invited originally.
You'll have to make another diagram. How do you want them seated?

MRS. PRINGLE: Give it to me. [She remains at the telephone table where there is a pad
and a pencil and makes a new diagram. ]

ELAINE: Here are some fresh cards. [She tears up the old cards, then goes back to help
DUNHAM, who is. having a maddening time with the table. ]

MRS. PRINGLE: What a mess! | spent hours over that diagram! So much depends upon
having guests seated harmoniously! There's the front door-bell, Dunham -- | told Annie to
answer it for you -- but go; peek into the drawing-room and tell me who it is-- [As DUNHAM
goes out, the telephone rings. MRS. PRINGLE eyes it suspiciously.] You murderous
instrument! What have you to say? Now what? Hello! Who! Mr. Farnsworth! Mr. Oliver
Farnsworth? No--you're his secretary? He's what? Instructed you to make his excuses! He
had to leave for Boston at once on very important business -- Oh! [She hangs up the
receiver without completing the conversation and hits the telephone in a temper, then
rises and paces back and forth in a rage.] How dare he! How dare he! The last moment like
this! No regard for a hostess’s feelings! No regard for the efforts she goes to to provide an
evening's enjoyment! And such a good dinner | planned -- and he promised he would come
-- business! | don't believe it! He didn't want to exert himself -- was afraid of freezing in
the blizzard -- as if he didn't have half a dozen limousines to carry him to the door --
selfishness -- downright rudeness -- and worth millions -~ just a match for you, Elaine --
and | was bound you should meet him and sit next to him at the table [she tears up his
card], and now | don't know when | can give you a chance like that again! I'm perfectly
furious -- I'll never speak to him again! | won't be treated that way--

ELAINE: [Timidly.] Perhaps he really did have business and was called away--

MRS. PRINGLE: [Not hearing her.] And | one of the most important hostesses in this city --
people clamoring to receive my invitations -- all my affairs are a success. Linsist that they
shall be -- | can’t bear a failure -- | won't have a failure -- he was my most important guest -
- he's such a man’s man -- so important financially -- every other man considers it an honor
to meet him -- and now not coming! I'm furious! Furious! --it's all this damnable blizzard!
ELAINE: Now | will have to stay away from the table. His not coming makes us thirteen
again.

MRS. PRINGLE: [In a temper.] Go to bed -- go up to the nursery! I'll send you milk and
crackers!

2A TTR, 186 2 TET

--- PAGE 187 ---
F Unit 16 * | FOURTEEN (One-Act Play), Alice Gerstenberg

ELAINE: But, mother, it's not my fault that he had business out of town.

MRS. PRINGLE: Yes, it is! If you'd perk up a bit and not be so timid and make something of
yourself, he would hear about your attractions from other men and be curious to meet
you himself -- Oh! What a family | have! No one to help me with my ambitions! Go to bed! |
certainly won't sit down to thirteen -- go to bed -- get out of my sight--

[DUNHAM enters from left. ]
DUNHAM: It was Mr. Morgan, madam--
MRS. PRINGLE: Mr. Morgan! But I telephoned his maid to tell him not tocome.

DUNHAM: He couldn't have received the second message, madam, for | heard him
explaining toMr. Pringle how happy he was to receive your telephone invitation.

ELAINE: That makes you thirteen again -- unless you don't want me to go to bed--

MRS. PRINGLE: Of course | don't want you to go to bed. We're back to where we started --
fourteen, Dunham,
DUNHAM: I'll get the cocktails ready, madam. Annie told me there were several motors
making their way through the-snow. It's late ndw and cook's swearing about the dinner
getting too dry-- [The telephone rings. ELAINE jumps. ]
ELAINE: | won't answer it.
MRS. PRINGLE: | should say not -- hello -- what is it? [Sharply.] Yes -- yes? Mrs. Tupper! Yes!
Mrs. Tupper! But now you must come -- we're prepared for you -- yes -- for eight of you --
Your daughter told my daughter about your house-guests and we are delighted to have
them -- but now we're set for you -- but every plate is set -- but your daughter was quite
right -- it wasn't an imposition at all -- but you must come now -- of course my daughter
had authority to invite the guests of -- Oh -- eight isn’t at all a big number -- there is room -
- the table is all set -- but | beg of you -- but my dear, you are not imposing -- Oh! but how
‘foolish of you to take that stand! Why my dear, my dear -= [She hangs up the receiver. ]
Now, what do you think of that? Mrs. Tupper is perfectly furious at Ella for telling you
about the house-guests, and says Ella has no tact; that nothing would induce her to bring
eight when we invited six -- so she’s leaving Ella and Henry at home -- only six are coming.
Remove two plates, Dunham -- we're twelve after all--
ELAINE: But if you leave it twelve, father can't sit at the end--
MRS. PRINGLE: [Exhausted, harassed, angry, tempestuous.] | shall go mad! I'll never
entertain again--never--never--people ought to know whether they're coming or not--but
they accept and regret and regret and accept--they drive me wild. [DUNHAM goes out.]
This is my last dinner party--my very last--a fiasco--an utter fiasco! A haphazard crowd--
hurried together--when | had planned everything so beautifully--now how shall | seat
them--how shall | seat them? If | put Mr. Tupper here and Mrs. Conley there then Mrs.
Tupper has to sit next to her husband and if | want Mr. Morgan there--Oh! It's impossible--|

Peat vo

--- PAGE 188 ---
F unit 16 | FOURTEEN (One-Act Play), Alice Gerstenberg

might as well put their names in a hat and draw them out at random--never again! I'm
through! Through with society--with parties--with friends--| wipe my slate clean--they'tl
miss my entertainments--they'll wish they had been more considerate--after this, I'm
gaing ta tive for myself! ('m going to be selfish and hard--and unsociable--and drink my
liquor myself instead of offering it gratis to the whole town!--I'm through--Through with
men like Oliver Farnsworth!--I don't care how rich they are! How influential they are--how
important they are! They're nothing without courtesy and consideration--business--off on
train--nonsense--didn't want to come--didn't want to meet a sweet, pretty girl--didn't
want to marry her--well, he's not good enough for you!--don't you marry him! Don't you
dare marry him! | won't let you marry him! Do you hear? If you tried to elope or anything
like that, I'd break it off--yes, | would--Oliver Farnsworth will never get recognition from
me!--He is beneath my notice! | hate Oliver Farnsworth!

[DUNHAM enters with a note ona silver plate. ]

DUNHAM: Anote from Mr. Farnsworth, madam--

MRS. PRINGLE: Anote from Mr. Farnsworth! [She takes and opens it.]

DUNHAM: Yes, madam, there are two strange gentlemen in the lower hall. They
presented this letter. He said he was the secretary. All the other guests are upstairs in the
drawing-room, madam, | counted twelve in all, including you and Mr. Pringle and Miss
Elaine. But the two gentlemen downstairs, madam, are waiting for your answer -- the one
gentlemen's face looked very familiar, madam, buthjust can't place him -- although I'm
sure I've seen his face somewhere--

MRS. PRINGLE: [She has been reading the note and is almost fainting with surprise and
joy.] Seen his face -- somewhere -- Oh, my goodness! Elaine’-- It'sthe Prince of Wales!
DUNHAM: The secretary said you cut off the telephone or central. disconnected you. He
was about to tell you that Mr. Farnsworth knew that the blizzard had prevented His
Highness from keeping an engagement way up town--

MRS. PRINGLE: The Prince of Wales sitting in my lower hall -- waiting for me'to ask him to
dinner--

ELAINE: Then we'll be thirteen again--

DUNHAM: There's the secretary, Miss, he is his bodyguard--

MRS. PRINGLE: [Rising to the occasion.] Certainly, the secretary, Elaine. We shall be
fourteen at dinner -- Serve the cocktails, Dunham -- the guests may sit anywhere they
choose. | shall bring the Prince in with me!

ELAINE: [Following.] But mother, wasn't it nice of Oliver Farnsworth to send a Prince in his
place?

MRS. PRINGLE: Didn't | always say that Oliver Farnsworth was the most considerate of
men?

--- PAGE 189 ---
F unit 16 | FOURTEEN (One-Act Play), Alice Gerstenberg

ELAINE: | think I shall like Mr. Farnsworth.

MRS. PRINGLE: Silly child! It is too late now to like Mr. Farnsworth. It's time now to like
the Prince. [Starting out.] | always manage somehow to be the most successful of
hostesses! Thank God for the blizzard!

CURTAIN

Alice Gerstenberg was born in Chicago, the only child of Julia and Erich Gerstenberg.
Gerstenberg's grandfather was a founder and member of the Chicago Board of Trade in
1848, a position Gerstenberg's father inherited later, which meant that the
Gerstenbergs enjoyed a higher standard of living than most middle-class families in
Chicago at the time. Growing up, Gerstenberg had ample travel experiences and social
indulgences including commercial theater. She attended a private school in Chicago
and later graduated from Bryn Mawr, a women's college in Pennsylvania, in 1907. After
college, she spent some time in New York watching the rehearsals of David Belasco

before returning home to Chicago. Fourteen is a play by Alice Gerstenberg. This one- |
act social satire was first performed October 7, 1919 at the Maitland Playhouse, 332
Stockton Street, San Francisco, on.a bill with three other one-act plays. Mrs. Pringle is
preparing to host a dinner party to introduce her daughter, Elaine, to the city’s most
eligible bachelor, Oliver Farnsworth. Illness and a blizzard force some guests to cancel,
and the three characters are compelled to try to salvage the evening and the dinner-
table layout

©

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look.at their meanings and give
synonyms of each in the given column. The first one is done for you, Also use these words
in your own sentences.

awning —=scanopy:: acovering supported bya frame
' va rae a board or leaf added to extend the length of}
pos dining table =

central the telephone exchange (Mrs. Pringle calls the
exchange to be put through a private number;
telephone numbers at that time consisted of
the district or area followed by the number)

EL anR ee «189 ee

--- PAGE 190 ---
F unit 16 | FOURTEEN (One-Act Play), Alice Gerstenberg

debutante a young woman who is being introduced :
formally into society by appearing at a public
: are

all card with somebody's name on it

place cards as
nature, character

of high spirits

7 Reading and Critical Thinking

a. Answer the following questions.
Who was Mrs. Pringle?
Who were the two gentlemen waiting in the lower hall?
Did Mrs. Pringle like Oliver Farnsworth?
What was the impact of Oliver Farnsworth secretary calling to cancel?
What value did Mrs. Pringle see in a marriage between Elaine and Mr. Farnsworth?
Which word sums up Mrs. Pringle’s motivations in the story?
Why did Mrs. Pringle insist on having only 14 people at the dinner party?
How did Mrs. Pringle show reaction to the cook's anger?
Why was Mrs. Pringle happy to know that the cook was in a bad temper?
. Why did Mrs. Pringle make new place cards and a new diagram?
. Why was Mrs. Pringle so upset when she learned Mr. Farnsworth would be unable to
attend the dinner?
12. What is the theme of the one- act play “Fourteen”?
- 43. Discuss the elements of the plot of the play.

Pewee Fre rs

st
—_- ©

b. Choose the best answer:
i. Mrs. Pringle is a woman of ;
a) old ideas b) fashion c) courage

Sees |

--- PAGE 191 ---
PF unit 16 | FOURTEEN (One-Act Play), Alice Gerstenberg

ii. Elaine didn't want to attend the party because she thinks everybody's
and older than she is.
a) married b) fashionable c) silly
iii. Mrs. Pringle wanted __§__====—EE——SS—sttco attend the dinner because she wanted
him to marry Elaine.
a) Dunham b) Mr. Farnsworth c) Prince of Wales

- ap we Oral Communication

* One - Act Play: - Students may perform this one act play in the class. They
must follow intonation patterns during dialogue delivery.

¢ Work in small groups to review the play. Take time to offer suggestions and
reasons for improvement.

* Do you think the dialogues provide necessary information about the characters
and the situation? Exchange views about it.

* The play becomes more forceful because the two characters are speaking
directly to one another. Opportunity should be provided to stage the play with
the help of the teacher.

Vocabulary and Grammar

Tenses: - Verbs come in three tenses: past, present, and future. The past is used
to describe things that have already happened (e. g. , earlier in the day,
yesterday, last week, three years ago). The present tense is used to describe
things that are happening right now, or things that are continuous.

a. Simple Present

The simple present is the most basic way to say something in the present tense.
We use it to talk about more general things that we do often or regularly, or to
state simple facts:

To use the simple present, we don't always need helping verbs. Simple present
sentence follows the pattern Subject + Present Verb.

| work at the mail.

They eat waffles for breakfast every day!

Irha likes candy.

a ea Pe

--- PAGE 192 ---
f unit 16 | FOURTEEN (One-Act Play), Alice Gerstenberg

b. Present Continuous

The present continuous tense describes actions and/or events that are currently
happening or going on now; in other words, things that are continuing to happen
right now in “real time. ” To do that, we use a verb ending in ing. Sentences in the
present continuous follow the Subject + Verb to be + ing Verb pattern:

Eshaal is listening to music.

| am eating a cheeseburger.

The dogs are barking loudly.

c. Present Perfect

We use the present perfect tense to share something that happened before, but is
still relevant-or important now. To use it, we always place the auxiliary have
before the main verb, which shows that we “have done it,” and it should be
followed by the past-tense form of the main verb. It may seem confusing that even
though we use a past verb, it's still the present tense—remember, we are showing
that something already happened, but still matters now!

As you know, the past form of regular verbs ends in ed, but irregular verbs have
different forms.

A sentence in the siaiaaales perfect should follow Subject + Have/Has + Past form
of main verb:

Ali has traveled to — but she really wants to go Venice.
They have lived in that house for 10 years.
d. Present Perfect Continuous

The present perfect continuous expresses actions (or events) that we have been
doing and are still doing. To use it, we need to use have and been combined with
the continuous form of the verb (ending in ing) to show that we “have been” doing
something. So, a sentence in the present perfect continuolis follows the Subject +
have/has been + ing Verb form:

Hassan has been listening to music online.
They have been living in that house since 2006.
He has been taking that exam for at least 2 hours.

a) Decide if the verb in brackets should be in the present simple or the present
continuous.

i. He —— (live) with his parents at the moment.

ii. Some areas of Italy ——- (become) drier.

iii, People ——- (live) longer if they live healthy life.
iv. This month they ——- (work) on a new project.

EUS ee ee ee 192 T_T)

--- PAGE 193 ---
[unit 16 FOURTEEN (One-Act Play), Alice Gerstenberg

b) Put the verbs into the correct form (present perfect simple).
i. He (write) five letters.
ii. She (not/see) him for a long time.
iii. (be / you) at school?
iv. We (buy) a new lamp.
c) Put the verbs into the correct form (present perfect continuous).

i. Ithas_ Ss Snowing a lot this week. (be, been, being)
ii. I'm tired because | been working out. (‘ve, has, am)
iii. Julie ___— _ Living in Italy since May. (has being, is been, has been)

iv. Has it
d) Use the given phrasal verbs in sentences.

raining since you arrived? ( be, been , is)

run over
run through

run away

run out

send back

set up

* Describe how realistic do you think the play is?

* Doyou agree with the end of the play? Give reasons.

+ Write a dialogue between any situation you like.

+ Some humor can be derived from a play. Describe the humor in this play.

* You have read the play. Now make a connection between characters, events,
motives and causes of conflicts in text across the culture.

eS 193 eee ee

--- PAGE 194 ---
FOURTEEN (One-Act Play), Alice Gerstenberg

MISPLACED MODIFIERS

When modifiers (adjectives and adverbs) are out of place, too far away from the
word they modify, the sentence will be awkward or confusing. Misplaced modifiers
may be single words, phrases, or clauses. Study the following examples:

1. The following words are often misplaced: almost, only, just, even, hardly, not,
nearly, merely.

Most often, these words are placed in front of the words they modify.

Misplaced: My sister only has two children.

Correct: My sister has only two children.

2. Here is an example of a misplaced phrase:

Misplaced: The little girl screamed at the library at her mother.

~ | Correct: At the library, the little girl screamed at her mother. _ °

3. Here is an example ofa misplaced clause:

Misplaced: | held the ticket tightly in my hand that my friend gave me.

Correct: | held the ticket that my friend gave me tightly in my hand.

a. Circle the sentence that is clearer. Be sure you can explain your choice.
| A. Maria only attended school half of the time.
B. Maria attended school only half of the time.

ii A. Let me caution you to for every second keep you eyes on your own J
paper. -.
B. Let me caution you to keep your eyes on your own paper for every
second.

iii A. With a little practice, you will be able to run nearly as fast as Carl
Lewis.
B. With a little practice, you will nearly be able to run as fast as Carl
Lewis.

iv A. From our seats high in the stadium, we watched the parachutists
float to earth.
B. We watched the parachutists float to earth from our seats high in

= the stadium.

iers Pot

* Discuss the two characters of the play with students,
‘s Discuss in detail about present tense and its kinds. Help them practice the concepts.
* Opportunity should be provided to stage the play with the help of the teacher.

‘nalish-11 Federal ISB Sia13 SideB Process Biaaki4/Da/on7m198-AK-DR-29

--- PAGE 195 ---
The Last Leaf (Short Story)

‘O. Henry

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

* speak confidently and fluently in a wide range of Contexts, For example, (conflict resolution, panel discussion,
role-play, dialogue, etc.) to fulfil different purposes (exposition, argumentation etc.)

* engage effectively in a range of collaborative discussions (one-on-one; in groups, and teacher-led) with diverse
partners on grade-level topics, texts, and issues

* read with accurate pronunciation, appropriate pitch and voice variation suitable for fictional and nonfictional

. texts

* ask and answer higher-order questions to guide/ assess reading

* evaluate how authors use language, including figurative language, considering the impact on the reader.

* use pre-reading and while-reading strategies to analyse and explore different layers of meaning within texts
including biases and opinions

* comment on implied meaning, e.g. writer's viewpoint, relationships between characters etc.

* apply skimming and scanning strategies for relevant information and main points in texts to identify the
writer's purpose, and intended audience. Infer the theme/main idea of the text, distinguishing between fact
and opinion where necessary

* acquire and use appropriate words and phrases for reading, writing, speaking, and listening; independently
gather vocabulary when considering a word or phrase important for comprehension or expression.

+ evaluate the particular elements of a story or drama (e.g., how the setting shapes the characters or plot)

+ Evaluate stages of plot development in a fictional text. (exposition, setting, climax, character development,

resolution)

* evaluate different points of view (e.g., first-person, third-person narrative) Examine an author's point of view
Or purpose in a text .

+ identify and correctly use patterns of word changes that indicate different meanings or parts of speech (e.¢.,
correct form of verb)

* use past tense correctly in speech and writing

* demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written communication in varying
degrees of complexity

* produce legible work that shows the correct spelling of the conventions of punctuation and capitalization

* use SuMMary Skills to write an objective summary of the given text and poems

--- PAGE 196 ---
The Last Leaf (Short Story), O. Hen

Pre-Reading
What does the title signify?
If we are in a difficult situation, can hope sustain us? Let us read.

Reading

IN ASMALL PART OF THE CITY WEST OF
Washington Square, the streets have gone
wild. They turn in different directions. They
are broken into small pieces called “places.”
One street goes across itself one or two times.
A painter once discovered something possible
and valuable about this street. Suppose a

he had not paid. Suppose he had no money.
Suppose a man came to get the money. The
man might walk down that street and
suddenly meet himself coming back, without having received a cent!

This part of the city is called Greenwich Village. And to old Greenwich Village the
painters soon came. Here they found rooms they like, with good light and at a low cost.

Sue and Johnsy lived at the top of a building with. three floors. One of these young
women came from Maine, the other from California. They had met at a restaurant on
Eighth Street. There they discovered that they liked the same kind of art, the same kind
of food, and the same kind of clothes. So, they decided to live and work together.

That was in the Spring.

Towards winter a cold stranger entered Greenwich Village. No one could see him.
He walked around touching one person here and another there with his icy fingers. He was
a bad sickness. Doctors called him Pneumonia. On the east side of the city he hurried,
touching many people; but in the narrow streets of Greenwich Village, he did not move so
quickly.

Mr. Pneumonia was not a nice old gentleman. While-reading

A nice old gentleman would not hurt a weak little
woman from California. But Mr. Pneumonia touched
Johnsy with his cold fingers. She lay on her bed
almost without moving, and she looked through the
window at the wall of the house next to hers.

Put students in pairs , then have
them read one paragraph at a time
silently. When they finish, ask them
to take turns paraphrasing the

paragraph they've just read.

isi EES 196 Eee

--- PAGE 197 ---
F unit 17 | The Last Leaf (Short Story), oO. Henry

One morning the busy doctor spoke to Sue alone in the hall, where Johnsy could
not hear.

“She has a very small chance,” he said. “She While-reading
has a chance, if she wants to live. If people don't
want to live, | can't do much for them. Your little :

specific information such as names,
lady has decided that she is not going to get well. Is | gates, times, and numbers
there something that is troubling her?” mentioned in the story.

Ask the students to locate the

“She always wanted to go to Italy and paint a
picture of the Bay of Naples,” said Sue.

“Paint! Not paint. Is there anything worth being troubled about? Aman?”
“Aman?” said Sue. “Is aman worth—No, doctor. There is not aman.”

“It is weakness,” said the doctor. “I! will do all | know how to do. But when a sick
person begins to feel that he's going to die, half my work is useless. Talk to her about new
winter clothes. If she were interested in the future, her chances would be better.”

After the doctor had gone, Sue went into the workroom to cry. Then she walked
into Johnsy'’s room. She carried some of her
painting materials, and she was singing.

Johnsy lay there, very thin and very quiet.
Her face was turned toward the window. Sue
stopped singing, thinking that Johnsy was asleep.

Sue began to work. As she worked, she
heard a low sound, again and again. She went
quickly to the bedside.

Johnsy's eyes were open wide. She was
looking out the window and counting—counting
back.

“Twelve,” she said; and a little later, “Eleven”;
and then, “Ten, “and, “Nine”; and then, “Eight,” and, While-reading
“Seven,” almost together.

Sue looked out the window. What was there to
count? There was only the side wall of the next house,

When does half of the work of a
doctor become useless?
a short distance away. The wall had no window. An old,

old tree grew against the wall. The cold breath of winter had already touched it. Almost
all its leaves had fallen from its dark branches.

“What is it, dear?” asked Sue.

Ter

197

--- PAGE 198 ---
F unit 17) The Last Leaf (Short Story), oO. Henry

“Six,” said Johnsy, in a voice still lower. “They're falling faster now. Three days ago
there were almost a hundred. It hurt my head to count them. But now it's easy. There goes
another one. There are only five now.”

“Five what, dear? Tell your Sue.”

“Leaves. On the tree. When the last one falls, | must go, too. I've known that for
three days. Didn't the doctor tell you?”

“Oh, | never heard of such a thing,” said Sue. “It doesn’t have any sense in it. What
does an old tree have to do with you? Or with your getting well? And you used to love that
tree so much. Don't be a little fool. The doctor told me your chances for getting well. He
told me this morning. He said you had very good chances! Try to eat a little now. And then
I'll go back to work. And then | can sell my picture, and then | can buy something more for
you to eat to make you strong.”

“You don't have to,buy anything for me,” said Johnsy. She still looked out the
window. “There goes another. No, | don't want anything to eat. Now there are four. | want
to see the last one fall beforenight. Then I'll go, too.”

“Johnsy, dear,” said Sue, “will you promise me to close your eyes and keep them
closed? Will you promise not to lookout the window until | finish working? | must have this
picture ready tomorrow. | need the light; I'can't cover the window.”

“Couldn't you work in the other room?” asked Johnsy coldly.

“I'd rather be here by you,” said Sue..“And | don’t want you to look at those
leaves.”

“Tell me as soon as you have finished,” said Johnsy. She closed her eyes and lay
white and still. “Because | want to see the last leaf fall have done enough waiting. | have
done enough thinking. | want to go sailing down, down, like oneof those leaves.”

“Try to sleep,” said Sue. “I must call Behrman to
come up here. | want to paint a man in this picture, and
I'll make him look like Behrman. | won't be gone a
minute. Don't try to move till | come back.”

While-reading

For how many years Old
Behrman had been a painter?
Old Behrman was a painter who lived on the first

floor of their house. He was past sixty. He had had no
success as a painter. For forty years he had painted, without ever painting a good picture.
He had always talked of painting a great picture, a masterpiece, but he had never yet
started it.

He got a little money by letting others paint pictures of him. He drank too much.
He still talked of his great masterpiece. And he believed that it was his special duty to do
everything possible to help Sue and Johnsy.

--- PAGE 199 ---
ama eee he Last Leaf (Short Story), O. Henry

Sue found him in his dark room, and she knew that he had been drinking. She could
smell it. She told him about Johnsy and the leaves on the vine. She said that she was
afraid that Johnsy would indeed sail down, down like the leaf. Her hold on the world was
growing weaker.

Old Behrman shouted his anger over such an idea.

“What!” he cried. “Are there such fools? Do people die because leaves drop off a
tree? | have not heard of such a thing. No, | will not come up and sit while you make a
picture of me. Why do you allow her to think such a thing? That poor little Johnsy!”

“She is. very sick and weak,” said Sue. “The sickness has put these strange ideas
into her mind, Mr. Behrman, if you won't come, you won't. But | don't think you're very
nice.”

“This is like a woman!” shouted Behrman. “Who said | will not come? Go. | come
with you. For half an hour| have been trying to say that I will come. God! This is not any
place for someone so good as Johnsy to lie sick. Someday | shall paint my masterpiece,
and we shall all go away from here. God! Yes.”

Johnsy was sleeping when they went up. Sue covered the window and took
Behrman into the other room. There they looked out the window fearfully at the tree.
Then they looked at each other for a moment without speaking. A cold rain was falling,
with a little snow in it too.

Behrman sat down, and Sue began to paint.

She worked through most of the night.

In the morning, after an hour's sleep, she went
to Johnsy's bedside. Johnsy with wide-open eyes was looking toward the window. “I want
tosee,” she told Sue.

Sue took the cover from the window.

But after the beating rain and the wild wind that had not-stopped through the
whole night, there still was one leaf to be seen against the wall. It*was the last on the
tree. It was still dark green near the branch. But at the edges it was turning yellow with
age. There it was hanging from a branch nearly twenty feet above the ground.

“It is the last one,” said Johnsy. “I thought it would surely fall during the night. |
heard the wind. It will fall today, and | shall die at the same time.”

“Dear, dear Johnsy!” said Sue. “Think of me, if you won't think of yourself. What
would | do?”

But Johnsy did not answer. The most lonely thing in the world is a soul when it is
preparing to go on its far journey. The ties that held her to friendship and to earth were
breaking, one by one.

The day slowly passed. As it grew dark, they could still see the leaf hanging from its

While-reading :

Why was Johnsy looking towards
the window?

--- PAGE 200 ---
(a Unie t7 The Last Leaf (Short Story), oO. Henry

branch against the wall. And then, as the night came, the north wind began again to blow.
The rain still beat against the windows. When it was light enough the next morning,
Johnsy again commanded that she be allowed to see.

The leaf was still there.

Johnsy lay for a long time looking at it. And then she called to Sue, who was cooking
something for her to eat.

“I've been a bad girl, Sue,” said Johnsy. “Something has made that last leaf stay
there to show me how bad | was. It is wrong to want to die. I'll try to eat now. But first bring
me a looking-glass, so that | can see myself. And then I'll sit up and watch you cook.”

An hour later she said, “Sue, someday | hope to paint the Bay of Naples.”

The doctor came in the afternoon. Sue followed him into the hall outside Johnsy’s
room to talk to him.

“The chances are good,” said the doctor. He took Sue's thin, shaking hand in his.
“Give her good care, and she'll get well. And now | must see another sick person in this
house. His name is Behrman.-A painter believes. Pneumonia, too. Mike is an old, weak
man, and he is very ill. There isno hope for him. But we take him to the hospital today.
We'll make it as easy for him as we can.”

The next day the doctor said to Sue: “She's safe. You have done it. Food and care
now—that's all.”

And that afternoon Sue came to the bed where Johnsy lay. She put one arm around
her.

“| have something to tell you”, she said. “Mr. Behrman died of pneumonia today in
the hospital. He was ill only two days. Someone found him onthe morning of the first day,
in his room. He was helpless with pain.”

“His shoes and his clothes were wet and as cold as ice. Everyone wondered where
he had been. The night had been so cold and wild.

“And then they found some things. There was a light that he had taken outside.
And there were his materials for painting. There was
paint, green paint and yellow paint. And—

“Look out the window, dear, at the last leaf on the
wall. Didn't you wonder why it never moved when
the wind was blowing? Oh, my dear, it is Behrman’s
great masterpiece—he painted it there the night
that the last leaf fell.”

Post-reading \
Bbc kidoect

| + Why did the \eaf not fall from the tree?

--- PAGE 201 ---
F unit 17 | The Last Leaf (Short Story), O. Henry

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give
synonyms of each in the given column. The first one is done for you. Also use these words
in your own sentences.

“words — Meanings , Synonyms —
quaint. attractively unusual or old-fashioned charming
prowl (of a person or animal) move around

restlessly and stealthily, especially in
search of or as if in search of prey

‘gable the part of a wall that encloses the end of a

pitched roof

greenwich a district of New York City on the lower west

Village side of Manhattan, traditionally associated
with writers, artists, and musicians

pewter a gray alloy of tin with copper and
antimony (formerly, tin and lead)

chafing dish a metal pan with an outer pan of hot water,
used for keeping food warm

table d'hoté a menu where multi-course meals with only a
few choices are offered for a fixed total price :

chicory an edible Mediterranean plant whose bitter

leaves may be blanched and used in salads;
also known as endive

“smite strike with a firm blow; defeat or conquer
chivalric displaying courteous behavior, as would be -
expected of an ideal knight Rar eh
-zephyrs a soft gentle breeze 5 > Sana
pneumonia _lung inflammation caused by bacterial or —s

viral infection, in which the air sacs fit with
pus and may become solid

pharmacopoeia a book, especially an official publication,
containing a list of medicinal drugs with
their effects and directions for their use; a
stock of medicinal drugs

jew's harp a small lyre-shaped musica! instrument held
between the teeth and struck with a finger.
It can produce only one note, but
harmonics are sounded by the player
altering the shape of the mouth cavity

--- PAGE 202 ---
P unit 17 The Last Leaf (Short Story), O. Henry
br. his aS GE

curative a medicine or remedy

solicitous characterized by or showing interest or
concern

scorn the feeling or belief that someone or
something is worthless or despicable;
contempt

serrated having or denoting a jagged edge; saw-like

mastiff a dog of a large, strong breed with drooping
ears and pendulous lips

fancy

a thing that one supposes or imagines,
typically an unfounded or tentative belief or
idea; notion or whim

a. Answer the following:
he

How does Behrman's last painting become a masterpiece and save a life in "The
Last Leaf" by O. Henry?

2. Analyze the friendship between Sue and Johnsy in"The Last Leaf" by O. Henry.

10.
11.

How would you describe the character of Mr. Behrman.in the story "The Last Leaf”
by O. Henry?

How is "The Last Leaf" by O. Henry astory of hope, friendship and sacrifice?

What is the point of view in O. Henry's short story "The Last Leaf," and what are
the three coincidences in this story?

Does Johnsy's doctor think that she will recover from her illness, and does Johnsy
plan on getting better?

How is pneumonia described in the story?

What is the significance of ivy leaves?

Who was struck by pneumonia in the story the last leaf?

What is the main idea of the story "The Last Leaf” by O’ Henry?

Discuss the following elements of the plot of the story: exposition, setting,
climax, character development, resolution.

--- PAGE 203 ---
a coven he Last Leaf (Short Story), O. Henry

b. Choose the best answer:

1. There are meteor showers each year
a) malaria b) pneumonia c) fever

ii. Behrman painted the leaf because he wanted to save 's life.
a) Sue b) Johnsy c) a boy

iii. Towards winter a cold stranger named ___—————s entered Greenwich Village,
a) Sue b) Behrman c) pneumonia

Oral Communication

Have you ever felt depressed and dejected? How did you overcome such feelings?
Share your experience with your classmates.

Activity

Recite a poem in line with the theme of Hope keeping in mind the following
points:

a) Read the poem aloud. Remember that reading poems is different from prose.
Like fiction, poems mostly do not have many characters. Even if you do not
understand the meanings, it gives you pleasure while reading.

b) Discuss whatever you have understood, and what you think is the message in
the text.

c) Do the students agree that one must never lose heart? Even the adverse
circumstances must be overcome with hope and determination.

Vocabulary and Grammar

Past Tense
The past tense is a verb tense used for a past activity or a past state of being. For
example:

| jumped in the lake.

| was happy.

a. Simple Past

The simple past is a “simple” way to share past events and can reflect something
happened from any time in the past. It's also the main way we express that we did

'
'
'
t

--- PAGE 204 ---
The Last Leaf (Short Sto O. Hen

something one time but can also cover things that happened many times. Its form is
easy: Subject + Past Verb.

| ate a cheese burger for dinner last night.

She ran fast!

b. Past Continuous

The past continuous tense shares events or actions that happened continuously; they
were going on for a while or over a period of time in the past. To show this, we use
verbs ending in ing. Sentences in the past continuous tense follow the form Subject +
Verb to be + ing Verb:

| was eating a cheese burger.

The dogs were barking loudly.

c. Past Perfect

The past perfect tense describes something that we have done before, but also
matters now. We use it toclarify that one event happened before another event in the
past. To use the past perfect, we need the auxiliary had before the main verb to show
that we “had done” something. Then, we need to add the main verb, in its past-tense
form. As you know, the past form of regular verbs ends in ed, but irregular verbs have
different forms. So, a sentence in the past perfect follows the form Subject + Had +
Past form of main verb:

Rayyan had traveled to Europe already, he wanted to go toAsia.

They had lived in that house for 10 years.

He had taken the exam already and felt confident that he had done well.

d. Past Perfect Continuous

The past perfect continuous describes actions that we had been doing or had been
going on continuously before a certain time in the past but aren't going on anymore.
It's often used to express a situation where something had been happening until
something else happened. To use it, we need to use had and been combined with the
continuous form of the verb (ending in ing) to show that we “had been” doing the
action.

Sentences written in the past perfect continuous follow Subject + had been + ing Verb:
They had been living in that house since 2006, but they moved.

He had been taking that exam for two hours when the teacher said, “Time's up!”

a) Make two sentences using simple present and past continuous tense.

dt

--- PAGE 205 ---
The Last Leaf (Short Sto O. Hen

b) Put the verbs into the correct form (past perfect tense).
i-The children collected the chestnuts that (fall) from the tree.

ii-He (not / be) to Cape Town before 1997.

iii-When she went out to play, she (do / already) her homework.

iv-My brother ate all of the cake that our mum (make). -

c) Make two sentences from past perfect continuous tense:.

=

d) Use the given phrasal verbs in sentences:
shop around

show off

sleep over

sort out
stick to

switch off

Summarize the story in your own words.

Teacher's Point

* Helpstudents to understand the theme of the story.
* Let them discuss their moment of tension, and how did they solve it?

--- PAGE 206 ---
The Necklace (Short Story)

Guy de Maupassant

After completing this lesson, students will be able to:

* speak confidently and fluently in a wide range of contexts, For example, (conflict resolution, panel discussion, role-
play, dialogue, etc.) to fulfil different purposes (exposition, argumentation etc. )

* perform a drama/ role play/play script showing different roles afd scenarios through deliberate choice of dialogues/
speech

* read with accurate pronunciation, appropriate pitch and voice variation suitable for fictional and nonfictional texts

* ask and answer higher-order questions to guide/assess reading

+ evaluate how authors use language, including figurative language, considering the impact on the reader

* use pre-reading and while-reading strategies to analyse and explore different layers of meaning within texts including
biases and opinions

* apply skimming and scanning strategies for relevant information and main points in texts to identify the writer's
purpose, and intended audience. Infer the theme/main idea of the text, distinguishing between fact and opinion
where necessary

+ evaluate the particular elements of a story or drama (e.g., how the setting shapes the characters or plot). Evaluate
stages of plot development in a fictional text. (exposition, setting, climax, character development, resolution)

* evaluate how authors use language, including figurative language, considering the impact on the reader

+ identify and correctly use patterns of word changes that indicate different meanings or parts of speech (e.g.
synonyms and antonyms)

* use future tense correctly in speech and writing

+ demonstrate knowledge and application of parts of speech in oral and written communication in varying degrees of
complexity

* apply knowledge of parts of speech, tenses, sentence structure and other features of grammar and vocabulary to
understand how language functions in different contexts, make effective choices for meaning or style while reading,
listening and writing

* produce legible work that shows the correct spelling of the conventions of punctuation and capitalization

* produce clear and coherent writing in which the development, organization, and style are appropriate to the task,
purpose, and audience

* write multiple paragraphs essays/stories; multi-stanza poems or playscript using mechanics of correct writing

* engage and orient the reader by setting out a problem, situation, or observation and its significance, establishing one

or multiple point(s) of view, and introducing a narrator and/or characters; create a smooth progression of
experiences or events

--- PAGE 207 ---
F unit 18 — The Necklace (Short Story), Guy de Maupassant

Pre-Reading
What do you understand by the title?
Read the first paragraph of the num then guess what the story

will be about.

Reading
She was one of those pretty and charming girls born, as if by an error of fate, into a family
of clerks. She had no dowry, no expectations, no means of becoming known, understood,
loved or wedded by a man of wealth and distinction; and so, she let herself be married to
a minor official at the Ministry of Education.

She dressed plainly because she had never been able to afford anything better, but she
was as unhappy as if she had once been wealthy. Women don't belong to a caste or class;
their beauty, grace, and natural charm take the place of birth and family. Natural
delicacy, instinctive elegance and a quick wit determine their place in society and make
the daughters of commoners the equals of the very finest ladies.

She suffered endlessly, feeling she was entitled to all the delicacies and luxuries of life.
She suffered because of the poorness of her house as she looked at the dirty walls, the
worn-out chairs and the ugly curtains. All these things that another woman of her class
would not even have noticed, tormented her.and made her resentful. The sight of the
little Brenton girl who did her housework filled her with terrible regrets and hopeless
fantasies. She dreamed of silent antechambers hung with Oriental tapestries, lit from
above by torches in bronze holders, while two tall footmen in knee-length breeches
napped in huge armchairs, sleepy from the stove's oppressive warmth. She dreamed of
vast living rooms furnished in rare old silks, elegant furniture loaded with priceless
ornaments, and inviting smaller rooms, perfumed, made for afternoon chats with close
friends - famous, sought after men, who all women envy and desire.

When she sat down to dinner at a round table covered with a three-day-old cloth opposite
her husband who, lifting the lid off the soup, shouted excitedly, “Ah! Beef stew! What
could be better, " she dreamed of fine dinners, of shining silverware, of tapestries which
peopled the walls with figures from another time and strange birds in fairy forests; she
dreamed of delicious dishes served on wonderful plates, of whispered gallantries listened
to with an inscrutable smile as one ate the pink flesh
of a trout or the wings of a quail.

She had no dresses, no jewels, nothing; and these | Ask the students to locate the
were the only things she loved. She felt she was
made for them alone. She wanted so much to
charm, to be envied, to be desired and sought after.

While-reading

specific information such as names,
dates, times, and numbers
mentioned in the story.

207

--- PAGE 208 ---
F unit 18 The Necklace (Short Story), Guy de Maupassant

She had a rich friend, a former schoolmate at the convent, whom she no longer wanted to
visit because she suffered so much when she came home. For whole days afterwards she
would weep with sorrow, regret, despair and misery.
One evening her husband came home with an air of triumph, holding a large envelope in
his hand.

“Look, “he said, “here's something for you. " While-reading

She tore open the paper and drew out a card, on
which was printed the words:

Make students consider other
perspectives of the text. After

"The Minister of Education and Mme. Georges | students have read the text one
Rampouneau request the pleasure of M. and Mme. | time, ask them to read it again and

Loisel’s company at the Ministry, on the evening of | Pretend they are reading it from
Monday January 18th.” someone else's point of view.

Instead of being delighted, as her husband had
hoped, she threw the invitation on the table resentfully, and muttered:
“What do you want me to do with that?”

“But, my dear, | thought you would be pleased. You never go out, and it will be such a
lovely occasion! | had awful trouble getting it. Everyone wants to go; it is very exclusive,
and they're not giving many invitations toclerks. The whole ministry will be there. "

She stared at him angrily, and said, impatiently:

“And what do you expect me to wear if | go?"

He hadn't thought of that. He stammered:” .

"Why, the dress you go to the theatre in. It seems very.nice tome..."

He stopped, stunned, distressed to see his wife crying. Two large tears ran slowly
from the corners of her eyes towards the corners of her mouth. He stuttered:

"What's the matter? What's the matter?”

With great effort she overcame her grief and replied in a calm voice, as she wiped
her wet cheeks:

"Nothing. Only | have no dress and so | can't go to this party. Give your invitation to a
friend whose wife has better clothes than | do. "

He was distraught, but tried again:

"Let's see, Mathilde. How much would a suitable dress cost, one which you could use
again on other occasions, something very simple?”

She thought for a moment, computing the cost, and also wondering what amount she
could ask for without an immediate refusal and an alarmed exclamation from the
thrifty clerk.

SEE 208 eS

--- PAGE 209 ---
The Necklace (Short Story), Guy de Mau ant

At last she answered hesitantly:
“| don’t know exactly, but | think | could do it with four hundred francs. "

He turned a little pale, because he had been saving that exact amount to buy a gun and
treat himself to a hunting trip the following summer, in the country near Nanterre, witha
few friends who went lark-shooting there on Sundays.

However, he said:

"Very well, | can give you four hundred francs. But try and get a really beautiful
dress. "

The day of the party drew near, and Madame Loisel seemed sad, restless, anxious. Her
dress was ready, however. One evening her husband said to her:

"What's the matter? You've been acting strange these last three days. "

She replied: "I'm upset that | have no jewels, not a single stone to wear. | will look
cheap. | would almost rather not go to the party. "

"You could wear flowers, “he said, "They are very fashionable at this time of year.
For ten francs you could get two or three magnificent roses. "

She was not convinced.

"No; there is nothing more humiliating than looking poor in the middle of a lot of rich
women. "

“How stupid you are!" her husband cried. "Go and see your friend Madame Forestier
and ask her to lend you some jewels. You know her well enough for that. "

She uttered a cry of joy.
"Of course. | had not thought of that. "
The next day she went to her friend's house and told her of her distress.

Madame Forestier went to her mirrored wardrobe, took out a large box, brought it
back, opened it, and said to Madame Loisel:

“Choose, my dear: "

First, she saw some bracelets, then a pearl necklace, then a gold Venetian cross set
with precious stones, of exquisite craftsmanship. She tried on the jewelry in the
mirror, hesitated, could not bear to part with them, to give them back. She kept
asking:

"You have nothing else?"

“Why, yes..But | don't know what you like. "

Suddenly she discovered, in a black satin box, a superb diam6hd necklace, and her
heart began to beat with uncontrolled desire. Her hands trembled as she took it. She
fastened it around her neck, over her high-necked dress, and stood lost in ecstasy as

--- PAGE 210 ---
F unit 18 | : The Necklace (Short Story), Guy de Maupassant

she looked at herself.
Then she asked anxiously, hesitating:
“Would you lend me this, just this?"
"Why, yes, of course. "

She threw her arms around her friend’s neck, embraced her rapturously, then fled
with her treasure.

The day of the party arrived. Madame Loisel was a success. She was prettier than all the
other women, elegant, gracious, smiling, and full of joy. All the men stared at her, asked
her name, tried to be introduced. All the cabinet officials wanted to waltz with her. The
minister noticed her.

She danced wildly, with passion, drunk on pleasure, forgetting everything in the triumph
of her beauty, in the glory of her success, in a sort of cloud of happiness, made up of all
this respect, all this admiration, all these awakened desires, of that sense of triumph that
is so sweet to a woman's heart.

She left at about four o'clock in the morning. Her husband had been dozing since
midnight in a little deserted anteroom with three other gentlemen whose wives were
having a good time.

He threw over her shoulders the clothes he had brought for her to go outside in, the
modest clothes of an ordinary life, whose poverty contrasted sharply with the elegance of
the ball dress. She felt this and wanted to run away, so she wouldn't be noticed by the
other women who were wrapping themselves in expensive furs.

Loisel held her back. ,

"Wait a moment, you'll catch a cold outside. I'll go and find.a cab. "

But she would not listen to him and ran down the stairs. When they were finally in the
street, they could not find a cab, and began to look for one, shouting at the cabmen they
saw passing in the distance.

They walked down toward the Seine in despair, shivering with cold. At last they found on
the quay one of those old night cabs that one sees in Paris only after dark, as if they were
ashamed to show their shabbiness during the day.

They were dropped off at their door in the Rue des Martyrs, and sadly walked up the
steps to their apartment. It was all over, for her. And he was remembering that he had to
be back at his office at ten o'clock.

In front of the mirror, she took off the clothes around her shoulders, taking a final look at
herself in all her glory. But suddenly she uttered a cry. She no longer had the necklace
round her neck!

"What is the matter?” asked her husband, already half undressed.

--- PAGE 211 ---
F unit 18 | The Necklace (Short Story), Guy de Maupassant

She turned towards him, panic-stricken.

“Ihave...lhave...!no longer have Madame Forestier’s necklace.”

He stood up, distraught.

"What! ... how! ... That's impossible!"

They looked in the folds of her dress, in the folds of her cloak, in her pockets,

everywhere. But they could not find it.

“Are you sure you still had it on when you left the ball?" he asked.

"Yes. | touched it in the hall at the Ministry.”

“But if you had lost it in the street, we would have heard it fall. It must be in the cab.”

"Yes. That's probably it. Did you take his number?”

“No. And you, didn’tyou notice it?”

"No."

They stared at each other, stunned. At last, Loisel put his clothes on again.

“I'm going back, “he said, “over the whole route we walked, see if | can find it."

He left. She remained in her ball dress all evening, without the strength to go to bed,
sitting ona chair, with no fire, her mind blank.

Her husband returned at about seven o'clock. He had found nothing.
He went to the police, to the newspapers to offer a reward, to the cab companies,
everywhere the tiniest glimmer of hope led him.
She waited all day, in the same state of blank despair from before this frightful disaster.
Loisel returned in the evening, a hollow, pale figure; he had found nothing. |
"You must write to your friend, “he said, “tell her you have broken the clasp of her
necklace and that you are having it mended. It will give us time to look some more.”
She wrote as he dictated.
At the end of one week, they had lost all hope.
And Loisel, who had aged five years, declared:
- "We must consider how to replace the jewel.”
The next day they took the box which had held it, and went to the jeweler whose name
they found inside. He consulted his books.
“It was not |, madame, who sold the necklace; | must simply have supplied the case.
And so, they went from jeweler to jeweler, looking for an necklace like the other one,
consulting their memories, both sick with grief and anguish.
Ina shop at the Palais Royal, they found a string of diamonds which seemed to be exactly
ae Rela aaa 5 ths La RE 211 =]

x

oS eR EE Saltese Ns Bs Whit

--- PAGE 212 ---
The Necklace (Short Story), Guy de Maupassant

what they were looking for. It was worth forty thousand francs. They could have it for
thirty-six thousand.

So they begged the jeweler not to sell it for three days. And they made an arrangement
that he would take it back for thirty-four thousand francs if the other necklace was found
before the end of February.

Loisel had eighteen thousand francs which his father had left him. He would borrow the
rest.

And he did borrow, asking for a thousand francs from one man, five hundred from
another, five louis here, three louis there. He gave notes, made ruinous agreements,
dealt with usurers, with every type of money-lender. He compromised the rest of his life,
risked signing notes without knowing if he could ever honor them, and, terrified by the
anguish still to come, by the black misery about to fall on him, by the prospect of every
physical privation andeyery moral torture he was about to suffer, he went to get the new
necklace, and laid downon the jeweler's counter thirty-six thousand francs.

When Madame Loisel took the necklace back, Madame Forestier said coldly:
"You should have returned it sooner; | might have needed it.”

To the relief of her friend, she didhot open the case. If she had detected the substitution,
what would she have thought? What Would she have said? Would she have taken her friend
for a thief?

From then on, Madame Loisel knew the horrible life of the very poor. But she played her
part heroically. The dreadful debt must be paid. She would pay it. They dismissed their
maid; they changed their lodgings; they rented a garret under the roof.

She came to know the drudgery of housework, the odious labors of the kitchen. She
washed the dishes, staining her rosy nails on greasy pots and the bottoms of pans. She
washed the dirty linen, the shirts and the dishcloths, whichshe hung to dry on a line; she

--- PAGE 213 ---
Unit 18 scranennmnanceneeememecenmmetnmnh Necklace (Short Story), Guy de Maupassant

carried the garbage down to the street every morning, and carried up the water, stopping
at each landing to catch her breath. And, dressed like a commoner, she went to the
fruiterer’s, the grocer’s, the butcher's, her basket on her arm, bargaining, insulted,
fighting over every miserable sou.

Each month they had to pay some notes, renew others, get more time.

Her husband worked every evening, doing accounts for a tradesman, and often, late into
the night, he sat. copying a manuscript at five sous a page.

And this tife lasted ten years.

At theend of ten years they had paid off everything, everything, at usurer’s rates
and with the accumulations of compound interest.

Madame Loisel tooked old now. She had become strong, hard and rough like all
women.of impoverished households. With hair half combed, with skirts awry, and
reddened hands, she talked loudly as she washed the floor with great swishes of
water. But sometimes, when her husband was at the office, she sat down near the
window and thought of that evening at the ball so long ago, when she had been so
beautiful and so admired.

What would have happened if shevhad not lost that necklace? Who knows, who
knows? How strange life is, how fickle! How little is needed for one to be ruined or
saved!

One Sunday, as she was walking in the Champs Elysées to refresh herself after the
week's work, suddenly she saw a woman walking with a child. It was Madame
Forestier, still young, still beautiful, still charming.

Madame Loisel felt emotional. Should she speak to her? Yes, of course. And now that
she had paid, she would tell her all. Why not?

She went up to her.

“Good morning, Jeanne."

The other, astonished to be addressed so familiarly by this common woman, did not
recognize her. She stammered:

“But - madame - | don't know. You must have made a mistake.”

"No, | am Mathilde Loisel.”

Her friend uttered a cry.

"Oh! . - - My poor Mathilde, how you've

changed! . - -”

"Yes, | have had some hard times since |
last saw you, and many miseries . . . and all
because of you! . . .”

--- PAGE 214 ---
The Necklace 2 (Short Story), Guy de y de Maupassant

LRTVIIMCDS

“Me? How can that be?"

"You remember that diamond necklace that you lent me
to wear to the Ministry party?”

"Yes. Well?”
"Well, | lost it."
“What do you mean? You brought it back.”

“| brought you back another exactly like it. And it has taken
us ten years to pay for it. It wasn't easy for us, we had very
little. But at last it is over, and | am very glad.”

Madame Forestier was stunned.
"You say that you bought a diamond necklace to replace mine?"
“Yes; you didn't notice then? They were very similar.”
And she smiled with proud and innocent pleasure.
Madame Forestier, deeply moved, took both her hands.
“Oh, my poor Mathilde! Mine was.an imitation! It was worth five hundred francs at

1 i]
most! . . .

* How long did it take to pay for the necklace?

Henri René Albert Guy de Maupassant (5 ‘August 1850-6 July 1893) was a 19th-century
French author, remembered as a master of the short story form, and as a representative
of the Naturalist school, who depicted human lives and destinies and social forces in
disillusioned and often pessimistic terms.

Maupassant was a protégé of Gustave Flaubert and his stories are characterized by
economy of style and efficient, seemingly effortless démouements (outcomes). Many
are set during the Franco-Prussian War of the 1870s, describing the futility of war and |
the innocent civilians who, caught up in events beyond their control, are permanently
changed by their experiences. He wrote 300 short stories, six novels, three travel
books, and one volume of verse. His first published story, “Boule de Suif" ("The |
Dumpling”, 1880), is often considered his masterpiece.

Theme

"The Necklace" or "The Diamond Necklace" (French: La Parure) is an 1884 short story by
French writer Guy de Maupassant. It is known for its twist ending (Ironic ending), which |
was a hallmark of de Maupassant's style. The story was first published on 17 February |
1884 in the French newspaper Le Gaulois. “The Necklace” is, at its‘heart, a story about
Mathilde's social ambition, which takes the form of a desire to acquire luxurious objects |
that she cannot afford. Through her ruin, Maupassant warns against the dangers of
greed and criticizes those who ascribe too much value to wealth and material
possessions. |

pO ree ee ee, 1

~——— be Kieticy 1214 as co aos “Sait. a CUA ht .

--- PAGE 215 ---
Unit 18

Given below are the difficult words from the unit. Look at their meanings and give
synonyms of each in the given column. The first one is done for you. Also use these words

in your own sentences.

words Meanings Synonyms

antechamber small room next to main bedrooms in a house or waiting room
apartments

ante-room small room before a main room

boudoirs bedrooms

breton the place, or someone who comes from

chagrin feeling of embarrassment and annoyance

candelabra branched candle holder for more than one candle

coupe's four wheeled horse-drawn carriage with two seats
inside and two seats outsides

disdain dislike

finesse elegant skill

frowsy untidy in appearance

gallantries polite words or actions

garret a room at the top of a house just under the room

homage to show respect

incessantly constantly

+)

Bi..g Reading and Critical Thinking

a. Answer the following questions:
1. Why was Mathilde unhappy with her life at the beginning of "The Necklace” by
Guy de Maupassant??
2. Why Mathilde did not to like to visit her rich friend?

~

How did Mathilde and her husband get money to pay for the new necklace?

4. What was it for the couple after they had returned the necklace to Madame
Forestier?

5. How does Mathilde change as a result of her experience in "The Necklace"?

--- PAGE 216 ---
Unit 18 Guy de Maupassant

Do you think Madame Loisel got what she deserved?

hat is the theme of "The Necklace"?

Write a character sketch of Madame and Mister Loisel.

Would you agree that Mathilde feels the end to borrow a necklace?

PON

b. Choose the best answer:
i. Mathilde did not to like to visit her rich friend because she was unhappy with

her ‘
a) husband b) looks c) poverty
ii. Her husband worked every evening, doing accounts for a tradesman, and often,
late into the night, he sat copying a manuscript at sous a page.
a) four b) five c) six
iii. was still young, still beautiful, still charming after ten years.
a) Madame Forestier b) Mathilde c) Madame Loisel

Oral Communication

Activity

+ Represent one or two of the major points of action of the story: when Madame
Loisel borrows the necklace from her friend, the affair... through a scene.

* Get into pairs and represent the last part of the story where Madame Forestier
and Mathilde Loisel-found each other after 10 years. Try to represent Mathilde’s
reaction when Madame Forestier tells her that the necklace, she lent her was
an imitation indeed.

Vocabulary and Grammar

Future tense:

it shows that the timeline of the action hasn't actually occurred yet, but will later.
For example:

| will write a book.
He will be writing a book.

--- PAGE 217 ---
Types of Future Tenses
a. Simple Future

You can use the simple future to talk about something (like an action or event) that will
happen any time in the future, and also to talk about something that will happen one
time. In the simple future, we use the base form of the verb with a modal auxiliary, like
will. So, the simple future follows the form Subject + modal + Base Verb.

| will eat a cheeseburger for dinner.

Jane might buy a new car tomorrow.

b, Future Continuous

The future continuous tense talk about things will be happening continuously in the

future. To show this, we use a modal, the verb to be, and a verb ending in ing.
Sentences in the future continuous tense follow the Subject + modal + Verb to be

+ ing Verb model:

Zara will be driving to work.

| will be running; the race at 6pm.

The dogs will be barking loudly when you arrive.
c. Future Perfect

The future perfect tense shows that an event will have happened before another thing
in the future. It often expresses that by the time one action or event happens, another
will have happened. To use the future perfect, we need to place the modal will and the
auxiliary have before the.past form of the main verb (this shows that we “will have
done” an action). Using a past verb in the future tense may seem confusing, but
remember, it's to show that something will have happened before another thing, so we
need it!

So, a sentence written in the future perfect should follow the Subject + will +
have + Past form of main verb pattern:

Faiza will have traveled the world by the time she turns 30.

They will have lived in 10 states once they move to New York.

He will have taken the exam already, so he won't need to study more.

d- Future Perfect Continuous

The future perfect continuous describes events and/or actions that have been going
on continuously until a certain time in the future. Often, it's used to show cause and
effect; in other words, because one thing will have been happening, another will
happen. To use it, we need to combine have and been with the continuous form of the
verb (ending in ing), this shows that the action or event “will have been” happening.

A sentence in the future perfect continuous follows Subject + modal + have been
+ ing Verb:

Mother will have been working for 12 hours, so | don't think she will want to cook.

| should have been watering the plants every day; | hope they won't die.

They will have been living in that house for 10 years this March.

He will have been driving since noon, so he will need a rest.

--- PAGE 218 ---
Unit 18 7 — The Necklace (Short Story),

a) Rewrite the underlined forms with the future simple or continuous.
i) Don't call me at 10 o'clock. | am going to fly to Spain.

ii)l suppose we ‘re going to stay at a hotel next summer.

iii) Do you think it is snowing at the weekend?

Iv) Is the coat OK.?- Yes, |am taking it.

V) This time on Sunday we are going to ski in France.

vi) Every student is using a computer in the near future.

b) Complete the sentences with the future perfect or the future continuous.
disappear, arrive, cook, watch, replace, move, finish, fly, teach, listen

i. When we reach Portsmouth, we our voyage.

ii. When | drive my car | to the new CD.

iii. In a twenty years’ time thousands of species from this
planet.

iv. In a few hours’ time we on the plane.

v. I'll meet you at four o'clock. - At four? I'm afraid !|_.._ ~~» _ECC CE nglish.

vi. We the wheels before you

come back from the shop.

vii. Shall | buy a pizza? - There's no need. | as usual.

viii.I'm sorry, we can't come tonight. We the new
documentary on TV.

ix. My new PC by the end of this week.

--- PAGE 219 ---
Unit 18

in their new

x. The Johnsons
house by Christmas.

c) Punctuate the given lines.
but madame | dont know you must have made a mistake

No lam Mathilde Loisel

d) Give antonyms of the following.
natural silent___-————_—s Strange
longer. CC‘ Slowly Ci COVE

e) Use the given phrasal verbs in sentences.
switch on
take apart
take back
take off
take out
tear up

.

Literary Devices:
Irony

lrony is about how your perception is different from how something really is. Irony has
disappointed many readers when they thought something would happen, but it didn't.
It comes in different forms like dramatic, verbal, or situational irony. For example:

My old English mastiff dog is named “Tiny”. (situational irony)

My son is as innocent as the devil. (verbal irony)

Flashback

You have flashbacks in life. For example, the smell of baking cookies takes you back to

cn intel ete a OE Tn | 219 lea aaa tN gio on deabsees Sr
, ye sats Ldn ts eS, eae =

--- PAGE 220 ---
outs _ The Necklace (Short Story), Guy de Mau nt
one d Z ee SS om ao |

a time you spend with your grandmother. Flashbacks in literature are the same. These
are story elements giving you insight to a previous moment or experience.
Standing on the edge of the cliff, she was suddenly transported back to the time when
she was two. She remembered the feeling of her heart pounding as she looked down at
the ground, seconds before falling.

Tone

Has anyone ever reprimanded you for your tone? Tone tells us a lot about what a
character is thinking, or the feeling the poem is trying to portray. It can be a happy,
energetic, or even melancholy tone.

The exhilarated girl danced along the sidewalk making her way to her friend's house.
(upbeat, happy tone)

Alliteration

A type of repetition, alliteration is when a letter is used repeatedly to add emphasis
and interest to a work. For example:

Sleepy sheep were shorn on Sunday.

The big black bear banged blandly on the bark.

Symbolism

Symbolism is a fun literary technique. Writers use this to add meaning to an object or
person within a story. Depending on the writer's creativity, the level of symbolism can
be basic or unique. For example:

In Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone, the scar on/his forehead symbolizes not only
his past but his future.

Plot Twist

Plot twist is a literary technique that introduces a radical.change in the direction
or expected outcome of e plot in a work of fiction. When it peppens near the
end of a story, it is known as a twist or surprise ending.

- Exploit the text of the story “The Necklace” to find examples of symbolism and
irony.
+ Find examples of alliteration in “The Necklace”.

« What moments have been revealed to the readers through the flashback
technique in “The Necklace”?

* Do you find twist in the plot of the above read story? Explain.
Teacher's Point
iY «Discuss with students about the evils of today’s world. Ask them to perform an evil role in the form of

role-play. Each character will reveal his bad quality and its impacts. Help your students in making a
positive citizen of society.

ee

re

